
                               A STUDY IN SCARLET

                                Table of contents

         Part I
        Mr. Sherlock Holmes
        The Science Of Deduction
        The Lauriston Garden Mystery
        What John Rance Had To Tell
        Our Advertisement Brings A Visitor
        Tobias Gregson Shows What He Can Do
        Light In The Darkness

         Part II
        On The Great Alkali Plain
        The Flower Of Utah
        John Ferrier Talks With The Prophet
        A Flight For Life
        The Avenging Angels
        A Continuation Of The Reminiscences Of John Watson, M.D.
        The Conclusion



















                                      PART I

                   (Being a reprint from the reminiscences of
                              John H. Watson, M.D.,
                      late of the Army Medical Department.)





          CHAPTER I
          Mr. Sherlock Holmes


     In the year 1878 I took my degree of Doctor of Medicine of the
     University of London, and proceeded to Netley to go through the
     course prescribed for surgeons in the army. Having completed my
     studies there, I was duly attached to the Fifth Northumberland
     Fusiliers as Assistant Surgeon. The regiment was stationed in India
     at the time, and before I could join it, the second Afghan war had
     broken out. On landing at Bombay, I learned that my corps had
     advanced through the passes, and was already deep in the enemy's
     country. I followed, however, with many other officers who were in
     the same situation as myself, and succeeded in reaching Candahar in
     safety, where I found my regiment, and at once entered upon my new
     duties.

     The campaign brought honours and promotion to many, but for me it had
     nothing but misfortune and disaster. I was removed from my brigade
     and attached to the Berkshires, with whom I served at the fatal
     battle of Maiwand. There I was struck on the shoulder by a Jezail
     bullet, which shattered the bone and grazed the subclavian artery. I
     should have fallen into the hands of the murderous Ghazis had it not
     been for the devotion and courage shown by Murray, my orderly, who
     threw me across a pack-horse, and succeeded in bringing me safely to
     the British lines.

     Worn with pain, and weak from the prolonged hardships which I had
     undergone, I was removed, with a great train of wounded sufferers, to
     the base hospital at Peshawar. Here I rallied, and had already
     improved so far as to be able to walk about the wards, and even to
     bask a little upon the verandah, when I was struck down by enteric
     fever, that curse of our Indian possessions. For months my life was
     despaired of, and when at last I came to myself and became
     convalescent, I was so weak and emaciated that a medical board
     determined that not a day should be lost in sending me back to
     England. I was dispatched, accordingly, in the troopship Orontes, and
     landed a month later on Portsmouth jetty, with my health
     irretrievably ruined, but with permission from a paternal government
     to spend the next nine months in attempting to improve it.

     I had neither kith nor kin in England, and was therefore as free as
     air--or as free as an income of eleven shillings and sixpence a day
     will permit a man to be. Under such circumstances, I naturally
     gravitated to London, that great cesspool into which all the loungers
     and idlers of the Empire are irresistibly drained. There I stayed for
     some time at a private hotel in the Strand, leading a comfortless,
     meaningless existence, and spending such money as I had, considerably
     more freely than I ought. So alarming did the state of my finances
     become, that I soon realized that I must either leave the metropolis
     and rusticate somewhere in the country, or that I must make a
     complete alteration in my style of living. Choosing the latter
     alternative, I began by making up my mind to leave the hotel, and to
     take up my quarters in some less pretentious and less expensive
     domicile.

     On the very day that I had come to this conclusion, I was standing at
     the Criterion Bar, when some one tapped me on the shoulder, and
     turning round I recognized young Stamford, who had been a dresser
     under me at Bart's. The sight of a friendly face in the great
     wilderness of London is a pleasant thing indeed to a lonely man. In
     old days Stamford had never been a particular crony of mine, but now
     I hailed him with enthusiasm, and he, in his turn, appeared to be
     delighted to see me. In the exuberance of my joy, I asked him to
     lunch with me at the Holborn, and we started off together in a
     hansom.

     "Whatever have you been doing with yourself, Watson?" he asked in
     undisguised wonder, as we rattled through the crowded London streets.
     "You are as thin as a lath and as brown as a nut."

     I gave him a short sketch of my adventures, and had hardly concluded
     it by the time that we reached our destination.

     "Poor devil!" he said, commiseratingly, after he had listened to my
     misfortunes. "What are you up to now?"

     "Looking for lodgings," I answered. "Trying to solve the problem as
     to whether it is possible to get comfortable rooms at a reasonable
     price."

     "That's a strange thing," remarked my companion; "you are the second
     man to-day that has used that expression to me."

     "And who was the first?" I asked.

     "A fellow who is working at the chemical laboratory up at the
     hospital. He was bemoaning himself this morning because he could not
     get someone to go halves with him in some nice rooms which he had
     found, and which were too much for his purse."

     "By Jove!" I cried, "if he really wants someone to share the rooms
     and the expense, I am the very man for him. I should prefer having a
     partner to being alone."

     Young Stamford looked rather strangely at me over his wine-glass.
     "You don't know Sherlock Holmes yet," he said; "perhaps you would not
     care for him as a constant companion."

     "Why, what is there against him?"

     "Oh, I didn't say there was anything against him. He is a little
     queer in his ideas--an enthusiast in some branches of science. As far
     as I know he is a decent fellow enough."

     "A medical student, I suppose?" said I.

     "No--I have no idea what he intends to go in for. I believe he is
     well up in anatomy, and he is a first-class chemist; but, as far as I
     know, he has never taken out any systematic medical classes. His
     studies are very desultory and eccentric, but he has amassed a lot of
     out-of-the way knowledge which would astonish his professors."

     "Did you never ask him what he was going in for?" I asked.

     "No; he is not a man that it is easy to draw out, though he can be
     communicative enough when the fancy seizes him."

     "I should like to meet him," I said. "If I am to lodge with anyone, I
     should prefer a man of studious and quiet habits. I am not strong
     enough yet to stand much noise or excitement. I had enough of both in
     Afghanistan to last me for the remainder of my natural existence. How
     could I meet this friend of yours?"

     "He is sure to be at the laboratory," returned my companion. "He
     either avoids the place for weeks, or else he works there from
     morning to night. If you like, we shall drive round together after
     luncheon."

     "Certainly," I answered, and the conversation drifted away into other
     channels.

     As we made our way to the hospital after leaving the Holborn,
     Stamford gave me a few more particulars about the gentleman whom I
     proposed to take as a fellow-lodger.

     "You mustn't blame me if you don't get on with him," he said; "I know
     nothing more of him than I have learned from meeting him occasionally
     in the laboratory. You proposed this arrangement, so you must not
     hold me responsible."

     "If we don't get on it will be easy to part company," I answered. "It
     seems to me, Stamford," I added, looking hard at my companion, "that
     you have some reason for washing your hands of the matter. Is this
     fellow's temper so formidable, or what is it? Don't be mealy-mouthed
     about it."

     "It is not easy to express the inexpressible," he answered with a
     laugh. "Holmes is a little too scientific for my tastes--it
     approaches to cold-bloodedness. I could imagine his giving a friend a
     little pinch of the latest vegetable alkaloid, not out of
     malevolence, you understand, but simply out of a spirit of inquiry in
     order to have an accurate idea of the effects. To do him justice, I
     think that he would take it himself with the same readiness. He
     appears to have a passion for definite and exact knowledge."

     "Very right too."

     "Yes, but it may be pushed to excess. When it comes to beating the
     subjects in the dissecting-rooms with a stick, it is certainly taking
     rather a bizarre shape."

     "Beating the subjects!"

     "Yes, to verify how far bruises may be produced after death. I saw
     him at it with my own eyes."

     "And yet you say he is not a medical student?"

     "No. Heaven knows what the objects of his studies are. But here we
     are, and you must form your own impressions about him." As he spoke,
     we turned down a narrow lane and passed through a small side-door,
     which opened into a wing of the great hospital. It was familiar
     ground to me, and I needed no guiding as we ascended the bleak stone
     staircase and made our way down the long corridor with its vista of
     whitewashed wall and dun-coloured doors. Near the further end a low
     arched passage branched away from it and led to the chemical
     laboratory.

     This was a lofty chamber, lined and littered with countless bottles.
     Broad, low tables were scattered about, which bristled with retorts,
     test-tubes, and little Bunsen lamps, with their blue flickering
     flames. There was only one student in the room, who was bending over
     a distant table absorbed in his work. At the sound of our steps he
     glanced round and sprang to his feet with a cry of pleasure. "I've
     found it! I've found it," he shouted to my companion, running towards
     us with a test-tube in his hand. "I have found a re-agent which is
     precipitated by hoemoglobin, and by nothing else." Had he discovered
     a gold mine, greater delight could not have shone upon his features.

     "Dr. Watson, Mr. Sherlock Holmes," said Stamford, introducing us.

     "How are you?" he said cordially, gripping my hand with a strength
     for which I should hardly have given him credit. "You have been in
     Afghanistan, I perceive."

     "How on earth did you know that?" I asked in astonishment.

     "Never mind," said he, chuckling to himself. "The question now is
     about hoemoglobin. No doubt you see the significance of this
     discovery of mine?"

     "It is interesting, chemically, no doubt," I answered, "but
     practically--"

     "Why, man, it is the most practical medico-legal discovery for years.
     Don't you see that it gives us an infallible test for blood stains.
     Come over here now!" He seized me by the coat-sleeve in his
     eagerness, and drew me over to the table at which he had been
     working. "Let us have some fresh blood," he said, digging a long
     bodkin into his finger, and drawing off the resulting drop of blood
     in a chemical pipette. "Now, I add this small quantity of blood to a
     litre of water. You perceive that the resulting mixture has the
     appearance of pure water. The proportion of blood cannot be more than
     one in a million. I have no doubt, however, that we shall be able to
     obtain the characteristic reaction." As he spoke, he threw into the
     vessel a few white crystals, and then added some drops of a
     transparent fluid. In an instant the contents assumed a dull mahogany
     colour, and a brownish dust was precipitated to the bottom of the
     glass jar.

     "Ha! ha!" he cried, clapping his hands, and looking as delighted as a
     child with a new toy. "What do you think of that?"

     "It seems to be a very delicate test," I remarked.

     "Beautiful! beautiful! The old Guiacum test was very clumsy and
     uncertain. So is the microscopic examination for blood corpuscles.
     The latter is valueless if the stains are a few hours old. Now, this
     appears to act as well whether the blood is old or new. Had this test
     been invented, there are hundreds of men now walking the earth who
     would long ago have paid the penalty of their crimes."

     "Indeed!" I murmured.

     "Criminal cases are continually hinging upon that one point. A man is
     suspected of a crime months perhaps after it has been committed. His
     linen or clothes are examined, and brownish stains discovered upon
     them. Are they blood stains, or mud stains, or rust stains, or fruit
     stains, or what are they? That is a question which has puzzled many
     an expert, and why? Because there was no reliable test. Now we have
     the Sherlock Holmes' test, and there will no longer be any
     difficulty."

     His eyes fairly glittered as he spoke, and he put his hand over his
     heart and bowed as if to some applauding crowd conjured up by his
     imagination.

     "You are to be congratulated," I remarked, considerably surprised at
     his enthusiasm.

     "There was the case of Von Bischoff at Frankfort last year. He would
     certainly have been hung had this test been in existence. Then there
     was Mason of Bradford, and the notorious Muller, and Lefevre of
     Montpellier, and Samson of new Orleans. I could name a score of cases
     in which it would have been decisive."

     "You seem to be a walking calendar of crime," said Stamford with a
     laugh. "You might start a paper on those lines. Call it the 'Police
     News of the Past.'"

     "Very interesting reading it might be made, too," remarked Sherlock
     Holmes, sticking a small piece of plaster over the prick on his
     finger. "I have to be careful," he continued, turning to me with a
     smile, "for I dabble with poisons a good deal." He held out his hand
     as he spoke, and I noticed that it was all mottled over with similar
     pieces of plaster, and discoloured with strong acids.

     "We came here on business," said Stamford, sitting down on a high
     three-legged stool, and pushing another one in my direction with his
     foot. "My friend here wants to take diggings, and as you were
     complaining that you could get no one to go halves with you, I
     thought that I had better bring you together."

     Sherlock Holmes seemed delighted at the idea of sharing his rooms
     with me. "I have my eye on a suite in Baker Street," he said, "which
     would suit us down to the ground. You don't mind the smell of strong
     tobacco, I hope?"

     "I always smoke 'ship's' myself," I answered.

     "That's good enough. I generally have chemicals about, and
     occasionally do experiments. Would that annoy you?"

     "By no means."

     "Let me see--what are my other shortcomings. I get in the dumps at
     times, and don't open my mouth for days on end. You must not think I
     am sulky when I do that. Just let me alone, and I'll soon be right.
     What have you to confess now? It's just as well for two fellows to
     know the worst of one another before they begin to live together."

     I laughed at this cross-examination. "I keep a bull pup," I said,
     "and I object to rows because my nerves are shaken, and I get up at
     all sorts of ungodly hours, and I am extremely lazy. I have another
     set of vices when I'm well, but those are the principal ones at
     present."

     "Do you include violin-playing in your category of rows?" he asked,
     anxiously.

     "It depends on the player," I answered. "A well-played violin is a
     treat for the gods--a badly-played one--"

     "Oh, that's all right," he cried, with a merry laugh. "I think we may
     consider the thing as settled--that is, if the rooms are agreeable to
     you."

     "When shall we see them?"

     "Call for me here at noon to-morrow, and we'll go together and settle
     everything," he answered.

     "All right--noon exactly," said I, shaking his hand.

     We left him working among his chemicals, and we walked together
     towards my hotel.

     "By the way," I asked suddenly, stopping and turning upon Stamford,
     "how the deuce did he know that I had come from Afghanistan?"

     My companion smiled an enigmatical smile. "That's just his little
     peculiarity," he said. "A good many people have wanted to know how he
     finds things out."

     "Oh! a mystery is it?" I cried, rubbing my hands. "This is very
     piquant. I am much obliged to you for bringing us together. 'The
     proper study of mankind is man,' you know."

     "You must study him, then," Stamford said, as he bade me good-bye.
     "You'll find him a knotty problem, though. I'll wager he learns more
     about you than you about him. Good-bye."

     "Good-bye," I answered, and strolled on to my hotel, considerably
     interested in my new acquaintance.





          CHAPTER II
          The Science Of Deduction


     We met next day as he had arranged, and inspected the rooms at No.
     221b, Baker Street, of which he had spoken at our meeting. They
     consisted of a couple of comfortable bed-rooms and a single large
     airy sitting-room, cheerfully furnished, and illuminated by two broad
     windows. So desirable in every way were the apartments, and so
     moderate did the terms seem when divided between us, that the bargain
     was concluded upon the spot, and we at once entered into possession.
     That very evening I moved my things round from the hotel, and on the
     following morning Sherlock Holmes followed me with several boxes and
     portmanteaus. For a day or two we were busily employed in unpacking
     and laying out our property to the best advantage. That done, we
     gradually began to settle down and to accommodate ourselves to our
     new surroundings.

     Holmes was certainly not a difficult man to live with. He was quiet
     in his ways, and his habits were regular. It was rare for him to be
     up after ten at night, and he had invariably breakfasted and gone out
     before I rose in the morning. Sometimes he spent his day at the
     chemical laboratory, sometimes in the dissecting-rooms, and
     occasionally in long walks, which appeared to take him into the
     lowest portions of the City. Nothing could exceed his energy when the
     working fit was upon him; but now and again a reaction would seize
     him, and for days on end he would lie upon the sofa in the
     sitting-room, hardly uttering a word or moving a muscle from morning
     to night. On these occasions I have noticed such a dreamy, vacant
     expression in his eyes, that I might have suspected him of being
     addicted to the use of some narcotic, had not the temperance and
     cleanliness of his whole life forbidden such a notion.

     As the weeks went by, my interest in him and my curiosity as to his
     aims in life, gradually deepened and increased. His very person and
     appearance were such as to strike the attention of the most casual
     observer. In height he was rather over six feet, and so excessively
     lean that he seemed to be considerably taller. His eyes were sharp
     and piercing, save during those intervals of torpor to which I have
     alluded; and his thin, hawk-like nose gave his whole expression an
     air of alertness and decision. His chin, too, had the prominence and
     squareness which mark the man of determination. His hands were
     invariably blotted with ink and stained with chemicals, yet he was
     possessed of extraordinary delicacy of touch, as I frequently had
     occasion to observe when I watched him manipulating his fragile
     philosophical instruments.

     The reader may set me down as a hopeless busybody, when I confess how
     much this man stimulated my curiosity, and how often I endeavoured to
     break through the reticence which he showed on all that concerned
     himself. Before pronouncing judgment, however, be it remembered, how
     objectless was my life, and how little there was to engage my
     attention. My health forbade me from venturing out unless the weather
     was exceptionally genial, and I had no friends who would call upon me
     and break the monotony of my daily existence. Under these
     circumstances, I eagerly hailed the little mystery which hung around
     my companion, and spent much of my time in endeavouring to unravel
     it.

     He was not studying medicine. He had himself, in reply to a question,
     confirmed Stamford's opinion upon that point. Neither did he appear
     to have pursued any course of reading which might fit him for a
     degree in science or any other recognized portal which would give him
     an entrance into the learned world. Yet his zeal for certain studies
     was remarkable, and within eccentric limits his knowledge was so
     extraordinarily ample and minute that his observations have fairly
     astounded me. Surely no man would work so hard or attain such precise
     information unless he had some definite end in view. Desultory
     readers are seldom remarkable for the exactness of their learning. No
     man burdens his mind with small matters unless he has some very good
     reason for doing so.

     His ignorance was as remarkable as his knowledge. Of contemporary
     literature, philosophy and politics he appeared to know next to
     nothing. Upon my quoting Thomas Carlyle, he inquired in the naivest
     way who he might be and what he had done. My surprise reached a
     climax, however, when I found incidentally that he was ignorant of
     the Copernican Theory and of the composition of the Solar System.
     That any civilized human being in this nineteenth century should not
     be aware that the earth travelled round the sun appeared to be to me
     such an extraordinary fact that I could hardly realize it.

     "You appear to be astonished," he said, smiling at my expression of
     surprise. "Now that I do know it I shall do my best to forget it."

     "To forget it!"

     "You see," he explained, "I consider that a man's brain originally is
     like a little empty attic, and you have to stock it with such
     furniture as you choose. A fool takes in all the lumber of every sort
     that he comes across, so that the knowledge which might be useful to
     him gets crowded out, or at best is jumbled up with a lot of other
     things so that he has a difficulty in laying his hands upon it. Now
     the skilful workman is very careful indeed as to what he takes into
     his brain-attic. He will have nothing but the tools which may help
     him in doing his work, but of these he has a large assortment, and
     all in the most perfect order. It is a mistake to think that that
     little room has elastic walls and can distend to any extent. Depend
     upon it there comes a time when for every addition of knowledge you
     forget something that you knew before. It is of the highest
     importance, therefore, not to have useless facts elbowing out the
     useful ones."

     "But the Solar System!" I protested.

     "What the deuce is it to me?" he interrupted impatiently; "you say
     that we go round the sun. If we went round the moon it would not make
     a pennyworth of difference to me or to my work."

     I was on the point of asking him what that work might be, but
     something in his manner showed me that the question would be an
     unwelcome one. I pondered over our short conversation, however, and
     endeavoured to draw my deductions from it. He said that he would
     acquire no knowledge which did not bear upon his object. Therefore
     all the knowledge which he possessed was such as would be useful to
     him. I enumerated in my own mind all the various points upon which he
     had shown me that he was exceptionally well-informed. I even took a
     pencil and jotted them down. I could not help smiling at the document
     when I had completed it. It ran in this way--

     Sherlock Holmes--his limits.
     
     1. Knowledge of Literature.--Nil.
     2. Philosophy.--Nil.
     3. Astronomy.--Nil.
     4. Politics.--Feeble.
     5. Botany.--Variable. Well up in belladonna, opium, and poisons
     generally. Knows nothing of practical gardening.
     6. Geology.--Practical, but limited. Tells at a glance different
     soils from each other. After walks has shown me splashes upon his
     trousers, and told me by their colour and consistence in what part of
     London he had received them.
     7. Chemistry.--Profound.
     8. Anatomy.--Accurate, but unsystematic.
     9. Sensational Literature.--Immense. He appears to know every detail
     of every horror perpetrated in the century.
     10. Plays the violin well.
     11. Is an expert singlestick player, boxer, and swordsman.
     12. Has a good practical knowledge of British law.

     When I had got so far in my list I threw it into the fire in despair.
     "If I can only find what the fellow is driving at by reconciling all
     these accomplishments, and discovering a calling which needs them
     all," I said to myself, "I may as well give up the attempt at once."

     I see that I have alluded above to his powers upon the violin. These
     were very remarkable, but as eccentric as all his other
     accomplishments. That he could play pieces, and difficult pieces, I
     knew well, because at my request he has played me some of
     Mendelssohn's Lieder, and other favourites. When left to himself,
     however, he would seldom produce any music or attempt any recognized
     air. Leaning back in his arm-chair of an evening, he would close his
     eyes and scrape carelessly at the fiddle which was thrown across his
     knee. Sometimes the chords were sonorous and melancholy. Occasionally
     they were fantastic and cheerful. Clearly they reflected the thoughts
     which possessed him, but whether the music aided those thoughts, or
     whether the playing was simply the result of a whim or fancy was more
     than I could determine. I might have rebelled against these
     exasperating solos had it not been that he usually terminated them by
     playing in quick succession a whole series of my favourite airs as a
     slight compensation for the trial upon my patience.

     During the first week or so we had no callers, and I had begun to
     think that my companion was as friendless a man as I was myself.
     Presently, however, I found that he had many acquaintances, and those
     in the most different classes of society. There was one little sallow
     rat-faced, dark-eyed fellow who was introduced to me as Mr. Lestrade,
     and who came three or four times in a single week. One morning a
     young girl called, fashionably dressed, and stayed for half an hour
     or more. The same afternoon brought a grey-headed, seedy visitor,
     looking like a Jew pedlar, who appeared to me to be much excited, and
     who was closely followed by a slipshod elderly woman. On another
     occasion an old white-haired gentleman had an interview with my
     companion; and on another a railway porter in his velveteen uniform.
     When any of these nondescript individuals put in an appearance,
     Sherlock Holmes used to beg for the use of the sitting-room, and I
     would retire to my bed-room. He always apologized to me for putting
     me to this inconvenience. "I have to use this room as a place of
     business," he said, "and these people are my clients." Again I had an
     opportunity of asking him a point blank question, and again my
     delicacy prevented me from forcing another man to confide in me. I
     imagined at the time that he had some strong reason for not alluding
     to it, but he soon dispelled the idea by coming round to the subject
     of his own accord.

     It was upon the 4th of March, as I have good reason to remember, that
     I rose somewhat earlier than usual, and found that Sherlock Holmes
     had not yet finished his breakfast. The landlady had become so
     accustomed to my late habits that my place had not been laid nor my
     coffee prepared. With the unreasonable petulance of mankind I rang
     the bell and gave a curt intimation that I was ready. Then I picked
     up a magazine from the table and attempted to while away the time
     with it, while my companion munched silently at his toast. One of the
     articles had a pencil mark at the heading, and I naturally began to
     run my eye through it.

     Its somewhat ambitious title was "The Book of Life," and it attempted
     to show how much an observant man might learn by an accurate and
     systematic examination of all that came in his way. It struck me as
     being a remarkable mixture of shrewdness and of absurdity. The
     reasoning was close and intense, but the deductions appeared to me to
     be far-fetched and exaggerated. The writer claimed by a momentary
     expression, a twitch of a muscle or a glance of an eye, to fathom a
     man's inmost thoughts. Deceit, according to him, was an impossibility
     in the case of one trained to observation and analysis. His
     conclusions were as infallible as so many propositions of Euclid. So
     startling would his results appear to the uninitiated that until they
     learned the processes by which he had arrived at them they might well
     consider him as a necromancer.

     "From a drop of water," said the writer, "a logician could infer the
     possibility of an Atlantic or a Niagara without having seen or heard
     of one or the other. So all life is a great chain, the nature of
     which is known whenever we are shown a single link of it. Like all
     other arts, the Science of Deduction and Analysis is one which can
     only be acquired by long and patient study nor is life long enough to
     allow any mortal to attain the highest possible perfection in it.
     Before turning to those moral and mental aspects of the matter which
     present the greatest difficulties, let the enquirer begin by
     mastering more elementary problems. Let him, on meeting a
     fellow-mortal, learn at a glance to distinguish the history of the
     man, and the trade or profession to which he belongs. Puerile as such
     an exercise may seem, it sharpens the faculties of observation, and
     teaches one where to look and what to look for. By a man's finger
     nails, by his coat-sleeve, by his boot, by his trouser knees, by the
     callosities of his forefinger and thumb, by his expression, by his
     shirt cuffs--by each of these things a man's calling is plainly
     revealed. That all united should fail to enlighten the competent
     enquirer in any case is almost inconceivable."

     "What ineffable twaddle!" I cried, slapping the magazine down on the
     table, "I never read such rubbish in my life."

     "What is it?" asked Sherlock Holmes.

     "Why, this article," I said, pointing at it with my egg spoon as I
     sat down to my breakfast. "I see that you have read it since you have
     marked it. I don't deny that it is smartly written. It irritates me
     though. It is evidently the theory of some arm-chair lounger who
     evolves all these neat little paradoxes in the seclusion of his own
     study. It is not practical. I should like to see him clapped down in
     a third class carriage on the Underground, and asked to give the
     trades of all his fellow-travellers. I would lay a thousand to one
     against him."

     "You would lose your money," Sherlock Holmes remarked calmly.  "As
     for the article I wrote it myself."

     "You!"

     "Yes, I have a turn both for observation and for deduction. The
     theories which I have expressed there, and which appear to you to be
     so chimerical are really extremely practical--so practical that I
     depend upon them for my bread and cheese."

     "And how?" I asked involuntarily.

     "Well, I have a trade of my own. I suppose I am the only one in the
     world. I'm a consulting detective, if you can understand what that
     is. Here in London we have lots of Government detectives and lots of
     private ones. When these fellows are at fault they come to me, and I
     manage to put them on the right scent. They lay all the evidence
     before me, and I am generally able, by the help of my knowledge of
     the history of crime, to set them straight. There is a strong family
     resemblance about misdeeds, and if you have all the details of a
     thousand at your finger ends, it is odd if you can't unravel the
     thousand and first. Lestrade is a well-known detective. He got
     himself into a fog recently over a forgery case, and that was what
     brought him here."

     "And these other people?"

     "They are mostly sent on by private inquiry agencies. They are all
     people who are in trouble about something, and want a little
     enlightening. I listen to their story, they listen to my comments,
     and then I pocket my fee."

     "But do you mean to say," I said, "that without leaving your room you
     can unravel some knot which other men can make nothing of, although
     they have seen every detail for themselves?"

     "Quite so. I have a kind of intuition that way. Now and again a case
     turns up which is a little more complex. Then I have to bustle about
     and see things with my own eyes. You see I have a lot of special
     knowledge which I apply to the problem, and which facilitates matters
     wonderfully. Those rules of deduction laid down in that article which
     aroused your scorn, are invaluable to me in practical work.
     Observation with me is second nature. You appeared to be surprised
     when I told you, on our first meeting, that you had come from
     Afghanistan."

     "You were told, no doubt."

     "Nothing of the sort. I knew you came from Afghanistan. From long
     habit the train of thoughts ran so swiftly through my mind, that I
     arrived at the conclusion without being conscious of intermediate
     steps. There were such steps, however. The train of reasoning ran,
     'Here is a gentleman of a medical type, but with the air of a
     military man. Clearly an army doctor, then. He has just come from the
     tropics, for his face is dark, and that is not the natural tint of
     his skin, for his wrists are fair. He has undergone hardship and
     sickness, as his haggard face says clearly. His left arm has been
     injured. He holds it in a stiff and unnatural manner. Where in the
     tropics could an English army doctor have seen much hardship and got
     his arm wounded? Clearly in Afghanistan.' The whole train of thought
     did not occupy a second. I then remarked that you came from
     Afghanistan, and you were astonished."

     "It is simple enough as you explain it," I said, smiling. "You remind
     me of Edgar Allen Poe's Dupin. I had no idea that such individuals
     did exist outside of stories."

     Sherlock Holmes rose and lit his pipe. "No doubt you think that you
     are complimenting me in comparing me to Dupin," he observed. "Now, in
     my opinion, Dupin was a very inferior fellow. That trick of his of
     breaking in on his friends' thoughts with an apropos remark after a
     quarter of an hour's silence is really very showy and superficial. He
     had some analytical genius, no doubt; but he was by no means such a
     phenomenon as Poe appeared to imagine."

     "Have you read Gaboriau's works?" I asked. "Does Lecoq come up to
     your idea of a detective?"

     Sherlock Holmes sniffed sardonically. "Lecoq was a miserable
     bungler," he said, in an angry voice; "he had only one thing to
     recommend him, and that was his energy. That book made me positively
     ill. The question was how to identify an unknown prisoner. I could
     have done it in twenty-four hours. Lecoq took six months or so. It
     might be made a text-book for detectives to teach them what to
     avoid."

     I felt rather indignant at having two characters whom I had admired
     treated in this cavalier style. I walked over to the window, and
     stood looking out into the busy street. "This fellow may be very
     clever," I said to myself, "but he is certainly very conceited."

     "There are no crimes and no criminals in these days," he said,
     querulously. "What is the use of having brains in our profession? I
     know well that I have it in me to make my name famous. No man lives
     or has ever lived who has brought the same amount of study and of
     natural talent to the detection of crime which I have done. And what
     is the result? There is no crime to detect, or, at most, some
     bungling villany with a motive so transparent that even a Scotland
     Yard official can see through it."

     I was still annoyed at his bumptious style of conversation. I thought
     it best to change the topic.

     "I wonder what that fellow is looking for?" I asked, pointing to a
     stalwart, plainly-dressed individual who was walking slowly down the
     other side of the street, looking anxiously at the numbers. He had a
     large blue envelope in his hand, and was evidently the bearer of a
     message.

     "You mean the retired sergeant of Marines," said Sherlock Holmes.

     "Brag and bounce!" thought I to myself. "He knows that I cannot
     verify his guess."

     The thought had hardly passed through my mind when the man whom we
     were watching caught sight of the number on our door, and ran rapidly
     across the roadway. We heard a loud knock, a deep voice below, and
     heavy steps ascending the stair.

     "For Mr. Sherlock Holmes," he said, stepping into the room and
     handing my friend the letter.

     Here was an opportunity of taking the conceit out of him. He little
     thought of this when he made that random shot. "May I ask, my lad," I
     said, in the blandest voice, "what your trade may be?"

     "Commissionaire, sir," he said, gruffly. "Uniform away for repairs."

     "And you were?" I asked, with a slightly malicious glance at my
     companion.

     "A sergeant, sir, Royal Marine Light Infantry, sir. No answer? Right,
     sir."

     He clicked his heels together, raised his hand in a salute, and was
     gone.





          CHAPTER III
          The Lauriston Garden Mystery


     I confess that I was considerably startled by this fresh proof of the
     practical nature of my companion's theories. My respect for his
     powers of analysis increased wondrously. There still remained some
     lurking suspicion in my mind, however, that the whole thing was a
     pre-arranged episode, intended to dazzle me, though what earthly
     object he could have in taking me in was past my comprehension. When
     I looked at him he had finished reading the note, and his eyes had
     assumed the vacant, lack-lustre expression which showed mental
     abstraction.

     "How in the world did you deduce that?" I asked.

     "Deduce what?" said he, petulantly.

     "Why, that he was a retired sergeant of Marines."

     "I have no time for trifles," he answered, brusquely; then with a
     smile, "Excuse my rudeness. You broke the thread of my thoughts; but
     perhaps it is as well. So you actually were not able to see that that
     man was a sergeant of Marines?"

     "No, indeed."

     "It was easier to know it than to explain why I knew it. If you were
     asked to prove that two and two made four, you might find some
     difficulty, and yet you are quite sure of the fact. Even across the
     street I could see a great blue anchor tattooed on the back of the
     fellow's hand. That smacked of the sea. He had a military carriage,
     however, and regulation side whiskers. There we have the marine. He
     was a man with some amount of self-importance and a certain air of
     command. You must have observed the way in which he held his head and
     swung his cane. A steady, respectable, middle-aged man, too, on the
     face of him--all facts which led me to believe that he had been a
     sergeant."

     "Wonderful!" I ejaculated.

     "Commonplace," said Holmes, though I thought from his expression that
     he was pleased at my evident surprise and admiration. "I said just
     now that there were no criminals. It appears that I am wrong--look at
     this!" He threw me over the note which the commissionaire had
     brought.

     "Why," I cried, as I cast my eye over it, "this is terrible!"

     "It does seem to be a little out of the common," he remarked, calmly.
     "Would you mind reading it to me aloud?"

     This is the letter which I read to him--

     "My dear Mr. Sherlock Holmes:
     "There has been a bad business during the night at 3, Lauriston
     Gardens, off the Brixton Road. Our man on the beat saw a light there
     about two in the morning, and as the house was an empty one,
     suspected that something was amiss. He found the door open, and in
     the front room, which is bare of furniture, discovered the body of a
     gentleman, well dressed, and having cards in his pocket bearing the
     name of 'Enoch J. Drebber, Cleveland, Ohio, U.S.A.' There had been no
     robbery, nor is there any evidence as to how the man met his death.
     There are marks of blood in the room, but there is no wound upon his
     person. We are at a loss as to how he came into the empty house;
     indeed, the whole affair is a puzzler. If you can come round to the
     house any time before twelve, you will find me there. I have left
     everything in statu quo until I hear from you. If you are unable to
     come I shall give you fuller details, and would esteem it a great
     kindness if you would favour me with your opinion.
     "Yours faithfully,
     "Tobias Gregson."

     "Gregson is the smartest of the Scotland Yarders," my friend
     remarked; "he and Lestrade are the pick of a bad lot. They are both
     quick and energetic, but conventional--shockingly so. They have their
     knives into one another, too. They are as jealous as a pair of
     professional beauties. There will be some fun over this case if they
     are both put upon the scent."

     I was amazed at the calm way in which he rippled on. "Surely there is
     not a moment to be lost," I cried, "shall I go and order you a cab?"

     "I'm not sure about whether I shall go. I am the most incurably lazy
     devil that ever stood in shoe leather--that is, when the fit is on
     me, for I can be spry enough at times."

     "Why, it is just such a chance as you have been longing for."

     "My dear fellow, what does it matter to me. Supposing I unravel the
     whole matter, you may be sure that Gregson, Lestrade, and Co. will
     pocket all the credit. That comes of being an unofficial personage."

     "But he begs you to help him."

     "Yes. He knows that I am his superior, and acknowledges it to me; but
     he would cut his tongue out before he would own it to any third
     person. However, we may as well go and have a look. I shall work it
     out on my own hook. I may have a laugh at them if I have nothing
     else. Come on!"

     He hustled on his overcoat, and bustled about in a way that showed
     that an energetic fit had superseded the apathetic one.

     "Get your hat," he said.

     "You wish me to come?"

     "Yes, if you have nothing better to do." A minute later we were both
     in a hansom, driving furiously for the Brixton Road.

     It was a foggy, cloudy morning, and a dun-coloured veil hung over the
     house-tops, looking like the reflection of the mud-coloured streets
     beneath. My companion was in the best of spirits, and prattled away
     about Cremona fiddles, and the difference between a Stradivarius and
     an Amati. As for myself, I was silent, for the dull weather and the
     melancholy business upon which we were engaged, depressed my spirits.

     "You don't seem to give much thought to the matter in hand," I said
     at last, interrupting Holmes' musical disquisition.

     "No data yet," he answered. "It is a capital mistake to theorize
     before you have all the evidence. It biases the judgment."

     "You will have your data soon," I remarked, pointing with my finger;
     "this is the Brixton Road, and that is the house, if I am not very
     much mistaken."

     "So it is. Stop, driver, stop!" We were still a hundred yards or so
     from it, but he insisted upon our alighting, and we finished our
     journey upon foot.

     Number 3, Lauriston Gardens wore an ill-omened and minatory look. It
     was one of four which stood back some little way from the street, two
     being occupied and two empty. The latter looked out with three tiers
     of vacant melancholy windows, which were blank and dreary, save that
     here and there a "To Let" card had developed like a cataract upon the
     bleared panes. A small garden sprinkled over with a scattered
     eruption of sickly plants separated each of these houses from the
     street, and was traversed by a narrow pathway, yellowish in colour,
     and consisting apparently of a mixture of clay and of gravel. The
     whole place was very sloppy from the rain which had fallen through
     the night. The garden was bounded by a three-foot brick wall with a
     fringe of wood rails upon the top, and against this wall was leaning
     a stalwart police constable, surrounded by a small knot of loafers,
     who craned their necks and strained their eyes in the vain hope of
     catching some glimpse of the proceedings within.

     I had imagined that Sherlock Holmes would at once have hurried into
     the house and plunged into a study of the mystery. Nothing appeared
     to be further from his intention. With an air of nonchalance which,
     under the circumstances, seemed to me to border upon affectation, he
     lounged up and down the pavement, and gazed vacantly at the ground,
     the sky, the opposite houses and the line of railings. Having
     finished his scrutiny, he proceeded slowly down the path, or rather
     down the fringe of grass which flanked the path, keeping his eyes
     riveted upon the ground. Twice he stopped, and once I saw him smile,
     and heard him utter an exclamation of satisfaction. There were many
     marks of footsteps upon the wet clayey soil, but since the police had
     been coming and going over it, I was unable to see how my companion
     could hope to learn anything from it. Still I had had such
     extraordinary evidence of the quickness of his perceptive faculties,
     that I had no doubt that he could see a great deal which was hidden
     from me.

     At the door of the house we were met by a tall, white-faced,
     flaxen-haired man, with a notebook in his hand, who rushed forward
     and wrung my companion's hand with effusion. "It is indeed kind of
     you to come," he said, "I have had everything left untouched."

     "Except that!" my friend answered, pointing at the pathway. "If a
     herd of buffaloes had passed along there could not be a greater mess.
     No doubt, however, you had drawn your own conclusions, Gregson,
     before you permitted this."

     "I have had so much to do inside the house," the detective said
     evasively. "My colleague, Mr. Lestrade, is here. I had relied upon
     him to look after this."

     Holmes glanced at me and raised his eyebrows sardonically. "With two
     such men as yourself and Lestrade upon the ground, there will not be
     much for a third party to find out," he said.

     Gregson rubbed his hands in a self-satisfied way. "I think we have
     done all that can be done," he answered; "it's a queer case though,
     and I knew your taste for such things."

     "You did not come here in a cab?" asked Sherlock Holmes.

     "No, sir."

     "Nor Lestrade?"

     "No, sir."

     "Then let us go and look at the room." With which inconsequent remark
     he strode on into the house, followed by Gregson, whose features
     expressed his astonishment.

     A short passage, bare planked and dusty, led to the kitchen and
     offices. Two doors opened out of it to the left and to the right. One
     of these had obviously been closed for many weeks. The other belonged
     to the dining-room, which was the apartment in which the mysterious
     affair had occurred. Holmes walked in, and I followed him with that
     subdued feeling at my heart which the presence of death inspires.

     It was a large square room, looking all the larger from the absence
     of all furniture. A vulgar flaring paper adorned the walls, but it
     was blotched in places with mildew, and here and there great strips
     had become detached and hung down, exposing the yellow plaster
     beneath. Opposite the door was a showy fireplace, surmounted by a
     mantelpiece of imitation white marble. On one corner of this was
     stuck the stump of a red wax candle. The solitary window was so dirty
     that the light was hazy and uncertain, giving a dull grey tinge to
     everything, which was intensified by the thick layer of dust which
     coated the whole apartment.

     All these details I observed afterwards. At present my attention was
     centred upon the single grim motionless figure which lay stretched
     upon the boards, with vacant sightless eyes staring up at the
     discoloured ceiling. It was that of a man about forty-three or
     forty-four years of age, middle-sized, broad shouldered, with crisp
     curling black hair, and a short stubbly beard. He was dressed in a
     heavy broadcloth frock coat and waistcoat, with light-coloured
     trousers, and immaculate collar and cuffs. A top hat, well brushed
     and trim, was placed upon the floor beside him. His hands were
     clenched and his arms thrown abroad, while his lower limbs were
     interlocked as though his death struggle had been a grievous one. On
     his rigid face there stood an expression of horror, and as it seemed
     to me, of hatred, such as I have never seen upon human features. This
     malignant and terrible contortion, combined with the low forehead,
     blunt nose, and prognathous jaw gave the dead man a singularly
     simious and ape-like appearance, which was increased by his writhing,
     unnatural posture. I have seen death in many forms, but never has it
     appeared to me in a more fearsome aspect than in that dark grimy
     apartment, which looked out upon one of the main arteries of suburban
     London.

     Lestrade, lean and ferret-like as ever, was standing by the doorway,
     and greeted my companion and myself.

     "This case will make a stir, sir," he remarked. "It beats anything I
     have seen, and I am no chicken."

     "There is no clue?" said Gregson.

     "None at all," chimed in Lestrade.

     Sherlock Holmes approached the body, and, kneeling down, examined it
     intently. "You are sure that there is no wound?" he asked, pointing
     to numerous gouts and splashes of blood which lay all round.

     "Positive!" cried both detectives.

     "Then, of course, this blood belongs to a second
     individual--presumably the murderer, if murder has been committed. It
     reminds me of the circumstances attendant on the death of Van Jansen,
     in Utrecht, in the year '34. Do you remember the case, Gregson?"

     "No, sir."

     "Read it up--you really should. There is nothing new under the sun.
     It has all been done before."

     As he spoke, his nimble fingers were flying here, there, and
     everywhere, feeling, pressing, unbuttoning, examining, while his eyes
     wore the same far-away expression which I have already remarked upon.
     So swiftly was the examination made, that one would hardly have
     guessed the minuteness with which it was conducted. Finally, he
     sniffed the dead man's lips, and then glanced at the soles of his
     patent leather boots.

     "He has not been moved at all?" he asked.

     "No more than was necessary for the purposes of our examination."

     "You can take him to the mortuary now," he said. "There is nothing
     more to be learned."

     Gregson had a stretcher and four men at hand. At his call they
     entered the room, and the stranger was lifted and carried out. As
     they raised him, a ring tinkled down and rolled across the floor.
     Lestrade grabbed it up and stared at it with mystified eyes.

     "There's been a woman here," he cried. "It's a woman's wedding-ring."

     He held it out, as he spoke, upon the palm of his hand. We all
     gathered round him and gazed at it. There could be no doubt that that
     circlet of plain gold had once adorned the finger of a bride.

     "This complicates matters," said Gregson. "Heaven knows, they were
     complicated enough before."

     "You're sure it doesn't simplify them?" observed Holmes. "There's
     nothing to be learned by staring at it. What did you find in his
     pockets?"

     "We have it all here," said Gregson, pointing to a litter of objects
     upon one of the bottom steps of the stairs. "A gold watch, No. 97163,
     by Barraud, of London. Gold Albert chain, very heavy and solid. Gold
     ring, with masonic device. Gold pin--bull-dog's head, with rubies as
     eyes. Russian leather card-case, with cards of Enoch J. Drebber of
     Cleveland, corresponding with the E. J. D. upon the linen. No purse,
     but loose money to the extent of seven pounds thirteen. Pocket
     edition of Boccaccio's 'Decameron,' with name of Joseph Stangerson
     upon the fly-leaf. Two letters--one addressed to E. J. Drebber and
     one to Joseph Stangerson."

     "At what address?"

     "American Exchange, Strand--to be left till called for. They are both
     from the Guion Steamship Company, and refer to the sailing of their
     boats from Liverpool. It is clear that this unfortunate man was about
     to return to New York."

     "Have you made any inquiries as to this man, Stangerson?"

     "I did it at once, sir," said Gregson. "I have had advertisements
     sent to all the newspapers, and one of my men has gone to the
     American Exchange, but he has not returned yet."

     "Have you sent to Cleveland?"

     "We telegraphed this morning."

     "How did you word your inquiries?"

     "We simply detailed the circumstances, and said that we should be
     glad of any information which could help us."

     "You did not ask for particulars on any point which appeared to you
     to be crucial?"

     "I asked about Stangerson."

     "Nothing else? Is there no circumstance on which this whole case
     appears to hinge? Will you not telegraph again?"

     "I have said all I have to say," said Gregson, in an offended voice.

     Sherlock Holmes chuckled to himself, and appeared to be about to make
     some remark, when Lestrade, who had been in the front room while we
     were holding this conversation in the hall, reappeared upon the
     scene, rubbing his hands in a pompous and self-satisfied manner.

     "Mr. Gregson," he said, "I have just made a discovery of the highest
     importance, and one which would have been overlooked had I not made a
     careful examination of the walls."

     The little man's eyes sparkled as he spoke, and he was evidently in a
     state of suppressed exultation at having scored a point against his
     colleague.

     "Come here," he said, bustling back into the room, the atmosphere of
     which felt clearer since the removal of its ghastly inmate. "Now,
     stand there!"

     He struck a match on his boot and held it up against the wall.

     "Look at that!" he said, triumphantly.

     I have remarked that the paper had fallen away in parts. In this
     particular corner of the room a large piece had peeled off, leaving a
     yellow square of coarse plastering. Across this bare space there was
     scrawled in blood-red letters a single word--

                                     RACHE.

     "What do you think of that?" cried the detective, with the air of a
     showman exhibiting his show. "This was overlooked because it was in
     the darkest corner of the room, and no one thought of looking there.
     The murderer has written it with his or her own blood. See this smear
     where it has trickled down the wall! That disposes of the idea of
     suicide anyhow. Why was that corner chosen to write it on? I will
     tell you. See that candle on the mantelpiece. It was lit at the time,
     and if it was lit this corner would be the brightest instead of the
     darkest portion of the wall."

     "And what does it mean now that you have found it?" asked Gregson in
     a depreciatory voice.

     "Mean? Why, it means that the writer was going to put the female name
     Rachel, but was disturbed before he or she had time to finish. You
     mark my words, when this case comes to be cleared up you will find
     that a woman named Rachel has something to do with it. It's all very
     well for you to laugh, Mr. Sherlock Holmes. You may be very smart and
     clever, but the old hound is the best, when all is said and done."

     "I really beg your pardon!" said my companion, who had ruffled the
     little man's temper by bursting into an explosion of laughter. "You
     certainly have the credit of being the first of us to find this out,
     and, as you say, it bears every mark of having been written by the
     other participant in last night's mystery. I have not had time to
     examine this room yet, but with your permission I shall do so now."

     As he spoke, he whipped a tape measure and a large round magnifying
     glass from his pocket. With these two implements he trotted
     noiselessly about the room, sometimes stopping, occasionally
     kneeling, and once lying flat upon his face. So engrossed was he with
     his occupation that he appeared to have forgotten our presence, for
     he chattered away to himself under his breath the whole time, keeping
     up a running fire of exclamations, groans, whistles, and little cries
     suggestive of encouragement and of hope. As I watched him I was
     irresistibly reminded of a pure-blooded well-trained foxhound as it
     dashes backwards and forwards through the covert, whining in its
     eagerness, until it comes across the lost scent. For twenty minutes
     or more he continued his researches, measuring with the most exact
     care the distance between marks which were entirely invisible to me,
     and occasionally applying his tape to the walls in an equally
     incomprehensible manner. In one place he gathered up very carefully a
     little pile of grey dust from the floor, and packed it away in an
     envelope. Finally, he examined with his glass the word upon the wall,
     going over every letter of it with the most minute exactness. This
     done, he appeared to be satisfied, for he replaced his tape and his
     glass in his pocket.

     "They say that genius is an infinite capacity for taking pains," he
     remarked with a smile. "It's a very bad definition, but it does apply
     to detective work."

     Gregson and Lestrade had watched the manoeuvres of their amateur
     companion with considerable curiosity and some contempt. They
     evidently failed to appreciate the fact, which I had begun to
     realize, that Sherlock Holmes' smallest actions were all directed
     towards some definite and practical end.

     "What do you think of it, sir?" they both asked.

     "It would be robbing you of the credit of the case if I was to
     presume to help you," remarked my friend. "You are doing so well now
     that it would be a pity for anyone to interfere." There was a world
     of sarcasm in his voice as he spoke. "If you will let me know how
     your investigations go," he continued, "I shall be happy to give you
     any help I can. In the meantime I should like to speak to the
     constable who found the body. Can you give me his name and address?"

     Lestrade glanced at his note-book. "John Rance," he said. "He is off
     duty now. You will find him at 46, Audley Court, Kennington Park
     Gate."

     Holmes took a note of the address.

     "Come along, Doctor," he said; "we shall go and look him up. I'll
     tell you one thing which may help you in the case," he continued,
     turning to the two detectives. "There has been murder done, and the
     murderer was a man. He was more than six feet high, was in the prime
     of life, had small feet for his height, wore coarse, square-toed
     boots and smoked a Trichinopoly cigar. He came here with his victim
     in a four-wheeled cab, which was drawn by a horse with three old
     shoes and one new one on his off fore leg. In all probability the
     murderer had a florid face, and the finger-nails of his right hand
     were remarkably long. These are only a few indications, but they may
     assist you."

     Lestrade and Gregson glanced at each other with an incredulous smile.

     "If this man was murdered, how was it done?" asked the former.

     "Poison," said Sherlock Holmes curtly, and strode off. "One other
     thing, Lestrade," he added, turning round at the door: "'Rache,' is
     the German for 'revenge;' so don't lose your time looking for Miss
     Rachel."

     With which Parthian shot he walked away, leaving the two rivals
     open-mouthed behind him. 





          CHAPTER IV
          What John Rance Had To Tell


     It was one o'clock when we left No. 3, Lauriston Gardens. Sherlock
     Holmes led me to the nearest telegraph office, whence he dispatched a
     long telegram. He then hailed a cab, and ordered the driver to take
     us to the address given us by Lestrade.

     "There is nothing like first hand evidence," he remarked; "as a
     matter of fact, my mind is entirely made up upon the case, but still
     we may as well learn all that is to be learned."

     "You amaze me, Holmes," said I. "Surely you are not as sure as you
     pretend to be of all those particulars which you gave."

     "There's no room for a mistake," he answered. "The very first thing
     which I observed on arriving there was that a cab had made two ruts
     with its wheels close to the curb. Now, up to last night, we have had
     no rain for a week, so that those wheels which left such a deep
     impression must have been there during the night. There were the
     marks of the horse's hoofs, too, the outline of one of which was far
     more clearly cut than that of the other three, showing that that was
     a new shoe. Since the cab was there after the rain began, and was not
     there at any time during the morning--I have Gregson's word for
     that--it follows that it must have been there during the night, and,
     therefore, that it brought those two individuals to the house."

     "That seems simple enough," said I; "but how about the other man's
     height?"

     "Why, the height of a man, in nine cases out of ten, can be told from
     the length of his stride. It is a simple calculation enough, though
     there is no use my boring you with figures. I had this fellow's
     stride both on the clay outside and on the dust within. Then I had a
     way of checking my calculation. When a man writes on a wall, his
     instinct leads him to write about the level of his own eyes. Now that
     writing was just over six feet from the ground. It was child's play."

     "And his age?" I asked.

     "Well, if a man can stride four and a-half feet without the smallest
     effort, he can't be quite in the sere and yellow. That was the
     breadth of a puddle on the garden walk which he had evidently walked
     across. Patent-leather boots had gone round, and Square-toes had
     hopped over. There is no mystery about it at all. I am simply
     applying to ordinary life a few of those precepts of observation and
     deduction which I advocated in that article. Is there anything else
     that puzzles you?"

     "The finger nails and the Trichinopoly," I suggested.

     "The writing on the wall was done with a man's forefinger dipped in
     blood. My glass allowed me to observe that the plaster was slightly
     scratched in doing it, which would not have been the case if the
     man's nail had been trimmed. I gathered up some scattered ash from
     the floor. It was dark in colour and flakey--such an ash as is only
     made by a Trichinopoly. I have made a special study of cigar
     ashes--in fact, I have written a monograph upon the subject. I
     flatter myself that I can distinguish at a glance the ash of any
     known brand, either of cigar or of tobacco. It is just in such
     details that the skilled detective differs from the Gregson and
     Lestrade type."

     "And the florid face?" I asked.

     "Ah, that was a more daring shot, though I have no doubt that I was
     right. You must not ask me that at the present state of the affair."

     I passed my hand over my brow. "My head is in a whirl," I remarked;
     "the more one thinks of it the more mysterious it grows. How came
     these two men--if there were two men--into an empty house? What has
     become of the cabman who drove them? How could one man compel another
     to take poison? Where did the blood come from? What was the object of
     the murderer, since robbery had no part in it? How came the woman's
     ring there? Above all, why should the second man write up the German
     word RACHE before decamping? I confess that I cannot see any possible
     way of reconciling all these facts."

     My companion smiled approvingly.

     "You sum up the difficulties of the situation succinctly and well,"
     he said. "There is much that is still obscure, though I have quite
     made up my mind on the main facts. As to poor Lestrade's discovery it
     was simply a blind intended to put the police upon a wrong track, by
     suggesting Socialism and secret societies. It was not done by a
     German. The A, if you noticed, was printed somewhat after the German
     fashion. Now, a real German invariably prints in the Latin character,
     so that we may safely say that this was not written by one, but by a
     clumsy imitator who overdid his part. It was simply a ruse to divert
     inquiry into a wrong channel. I'm not going to tell you much more of
     the case, Doctor. You know a conjuror gets no credit when once he has
     explained his trick, and if I show you too much of my method of
     working, you will come to the conclusion that I am a very ordinary
     individual after all."

     "I shall never do that," I answered; "you have brought detection as
     near an exact science as it ever will be brought in this world."

     My companion flushed up with pleasure at my words, and the earnest
     way in which I uttered them. I had already observed that he was as
     sensitive to flattery on the score of his art as any girl could be of
     her beauty.

     "I'll tell you one other thing," he said. "Patent-leathers and
     Square-toes came in the same cab, and they walked down the pathway
     together as friendly as possible--arm-in-arm, in all probability.
     When they got inside they walked up and down the room--or rather,
     Patent-leathers stood still while Square-toes walked up and down. I
     could read all that in the dust; and I could read that as he walked
     he grew more and more excited. That is shown by the increased length
     of his strides. He was talking all the while, and working himself up,
     no doubt, into a fury. Then the tragedy occurred. I've told you all I
     know myself now, for the rest is mere surmise and conjecture. We have
     a good working basis, however, on which to start. We must hurry up,
     for I want to go to Halle's concert to hear Norman Neruda this
     afternoon."

     This conversation had occurred while our cab had been threading its
     way through a long succession of dingy streets and dreary by-ways. In
     the dingiest and dreariest of them our driver suddenly came to a
     stand. "That's Audley Court in there," he said, pointing to a narrow
     slit in the line of dead-coloured brick. "You'll find me here when
     you come back."

     Audley Court was not an attractive locality. The narrow passage led
     us into a quadrangle paved with flags and lined by sordid dwellings.
     We picked our way among groups of dirty children, and through lines
     of discoloured linen, until we came to Number 46, the door of which
     was decorated with a small slip of brass on which the name Rance was
     engraved. On enquiry we found that the constable was in bed, and we
     were shown into a little front parlour to await his coming.

     He appeared presently, looking a little irritable at being disturbed
     in his slumbers. "I made my report at the office," he said.

     Holmes took a half-sovereign from his pocket and played with it
     pensively. "We thought that we should like to hear it all from your
     own lips," he said.

     "I shall be most happy to tell you anything I can," the constable
     answered with his eyes upon the little golden disk.

     "Just let us hear it all in your own way as it occurred."

     Rance sat down on the horsehair sofa, and knitted his brows as though
     determined not to omit anything in his narrative.

     "I'll tell it ye from the beginning," he said. "My time is from ten
     at night to six in the morning. At eleven there was a fight at the
     'White Hart'; but bar that all was quiet enough on the beat. At one
     o'clock it began to rain, and I met Harry Murcher--him who has the
     Holland Grove beat--and we stood together at the corner of Henrietta
     Street a-talkin'. Presently--maybe about two or a little after--I
     thought I would take a look round and see that all was right down the
     Brixton Road. It was precious dirty and lonely. Not a soul did I meet
     all the way down, though a cab or two went past me. I was a strollin'
     down, thinkin' between ourselves how uncommon handy a four of gin hot
     would be, when suddenly the glint of a light caught my eye in the
     window of that same house. Now, I knew that them two houses in
     Lauriston Gardens was empty on account of him that owns them who
     won't have the drains seed to, though the very last tenant what lived
     in one of them died o' typhoid fever. I was knocked all in a heap
     therefore at seeing a light in the window, and I suspected as
     something was wrong. When I got to the door--"

     "You stopped, and then walked back to the garden gate," my companion
     interrupted. "What did you do that for?"

     Rance gave a violent jump, and stared at Sherlock Holmes with the
     utmost amazement upon his features.

     "Why, that's true, sir," he said; "though how you come to know it,
     Heaven only knows. Ye see, when I got up to the door it was so still
     and so lonesome, that I thought I'd be none the worse for some one
     with me. I ain't afeared of anything on this side o' the grave; but I
     thought that maybe it was him that died o' the typhoid inspecting the
     drains what killed him. The thought gave me a kind o' turn, and I
     walked back to the gate to see if I could see Murcher's lantern, but
     there wasn't no sign of him nor of anyone else."

     "There was no one in the street?"

     "Not a livin' soul, sir, nor as much as a dog. Then I pulled myself
     together and went back and pushed the door open. All was quiet
     inside, so I went into the room where the light was a-burnin'. There
     was a candle flickerin' on the mantelpiece--a red wax one--and by its
     light I saw--"

     "Yes, I know all that you saw. You walked round the room several
     times, and you knelt down by the body, and then you walked through
     and tried the kitchen door, and then--"

     John Rance sprang to his feet with a frightened face and suspicion in
     his eyes. "Where was you hid to see all that?" he cried. "It seems to
     me that you knows a deal more than you should."

     Holmes laughed and threw his card across the table to the constable.
     "Don't get arresting me for the murder," he said. "I am one of the
     hounds and not the wolf; Mr. Gregson or Mr. Lestrade will answer for
     that. Go on, though. What did you do next?"

     Rance resumed his seat, without however losing his mystified
     expression. "I went back to the gate and sounded my whistle. That
     brought Murcher and two more to the spot."

     "Was the street empty then?"

     "Well, it was, as far as anybody that could be of any good goes."

     "What do you mean?"

     The constable's features broadened into a grin. "I've seen many a
     drunk chap in my time," he said, "but never anyone so cryin' drunk as
     that cove. He was at the gate when I came out, a-leanin' up ag'in the
     railings, and a-singin' at the pitch o' his lungs about Columbine's
     New-fangled Banner, or some such stuff. He couldn't stand, far less
     help."

     "What sort of a man was he?" asked Sherlock Holmes.

     John Rance appeared to be somewhat irritated at this digression. "He
     was an uncommon drunk sort o' man," he said. "He'd ha' found hisself
     in the station if we hadn't been so took up."

     "His face--his dress--didn't you notice them?" Holmes broke in
     impatiently.

     "I should think I did notice them, seeing that I had to prop him
     up--me and Murcher between us. He was a long chap, with a red face,
     the lower part muffled round--"

     "That will do," cried Holmes. "What became of him?"

     "We'd enough to do without lookin' after him," the policeman said, in
     an aggrieved voice. "I'll wager he found his way home all right."

     "How was he dressed?"

     "A brown overcoat."

     "Had he a whip in his hand?"

     "A whip--no."

     "He must have left it behind," muttered my companion. "You didn't
     happen to see or hear a cab after that?"

     "No."

     "There's a half-sovereign for you," my companion said, standing up
     and taking his hat. "I am afraid, Rance, that you will never rise in
     the force. That head of yours should be for use as well as ornament.
     You might have gained your sergeant's stripes last night. The man
     whom you held in your hands is the man who holds the clue of this
     mystery, and whom we are seeking. There is no use of arguing about it
     now; I tell you that it is so. Come along, Doctor."

     We started off for the cab together, leaving our informant
     incredulous, but obviously uncomfortable.

     "The blundering fool," Holmes said, bitterly, as we drove back to our
     lodgings. "Just to think of his having such an incomparable bit of
     good luck, and not taking advantage of it."

     "I am rather in the dark still. It is true that the description of
     this man tallies with your idea of the second party in this mystery.
     But why should he come back to the house after leaving it? That is
     not the way of criminals."

     "The ring, man, the ring: that was what he came back for. If we have
     no other way of catching him, we can always bait our line with the
     ring. I shall have him, Doctor--I'll lay you two to one that I have
     him. I must thank you for it all. I might not have gone but for you,
     and so have missed the finest study I ever came across: a study in
     scarlet, eh? Why shouldn't we use a little art jargon. There's the
     scarlet thread of murder running through the colourless skein of
     life, and our duty is to unravel it, and isolate it, and expose every
     inch of it. And now for lunch, and then for Norman Neruda. Her attack
     and her bowing are splendid. What's that little thing of Chopin's she
     plays so magnificently: Tra-la-la-lira-lira-lay."

     Leaning back in the cab, this amateur bloodhound carolled away like a
     lark while I meditated upon the many-sidedness of the human mind.





          CHAPTER V
          Our Advertisement Brings A Visitor


     Our morning's exertions had been too much for my weak health, and I
     was tired out in the afternoon. After Holmes' departure for the
     concert, I lay down upon the sofa and endeavoured to get a couple of
     hours' sleep. It was a useless attempt. My mind had been too much
     excited by all that had occurred, and the strangest fancies and
     surmises crowded into it. Every time that I closed my eyes I saw
     before me the distorted baboon-like countenance of the murdered man.
     So sinister was the impression which that face had produced upon me
     that I found it difficult to feel anything but gratitude for him who
     had removed its owner from the world. If ever human features bespoke
     vice of the most malignant type, they were certainly those of Enoch
     J. Drebber, of Cleveland. Still I recognized that justice must be
     done, and that the depravity of the victim was no condonement in the
     eyes of the law.

     The more I thought of it the more extraordinary did my companion's
     hypothesis, that the man had been poisoned, appear. I remembered how
     he had sniffed his lips, and had no doubt that he had detected
     something which had given rise to the idea. Then, again, if not
     poison, what had caused the man's death, since there was neither
     wound nor marks of strangulation? But, on the other hand, whose blood
     was that which lay so thickly upon the floor? There were no signs of
     a struggle, nor had the victim any weapon with which he might have
     wounded an antagonist. As long as all these questions were unsolved,
     I felt that sleep would be no easy matter, either for Holmes or
     myself. His quiet self-confident manner convinced me that he had
     already formed a theory which explained all the facts, though what it
     was I could not for an instant conjecture.

     He was very late in returning--so late, that I knew that the concert
     could not have detained him all the time. Dinner was on the table
     before he appeared.

     "It was magnificent," he said, as he took his seat. "Do you remember
     what Darwin says about music? He claims that the power of producing
     and appreciating it existed among the human race long before the
     power of speech was arrived at. Perhaps that is why we are so subtly
     influenced by it. There are vague memories in our souls of those
     misty centuries when the world was in its childhood."

     "That's rather a broad idea," I remarked.

     "One's ideas must be as broad as Nature if they are to interpret
     Nature," he answered. "What's the matter? You're not looking quite
     yourself. This Brixton Road affair has upset you."

     "To tell the truth, it has," I said. "I ought to be more
     case-hardened after my Afghan experiences. I saw my own comrades
     hacked to pieces at Maiwand without losing my nerve."

     "I can understand. There is a mystery about this which stimulates the
     imagination; where there is no imagination there is no horror. Have
     you seen the evening paper?"

     "No."

     "It gives a fairly good account of the affair. It does not mention
     the fact that when the man was raised up, a woman's wedding ring fell
     upon the floor. It is just as well it does not."

     "Why?"

     "Look at this advertisement," he answered. "I had one sent to every
     paper this morning immediately after the affair."

     He threw the paper across to me and I glanced at the place indicated.
     It was the first announcement in the "Found" column. "In Brixton
     Road, this morning," it ran, "a plain gold wedding ring, found in the
     roadway between the 'White Hart' Tavern and Holland Grove. Apply Dr.
     Watson, 221b, Baker Street, between eight and nine this evening."

     "Excuse my using your name," he said. "If I used my own some of these
     dunderheads would recognize it, and want to meddle in the affair."

     "That is all right," I answered. "But supposing anyone applies, I
     have no ring."

     "Oh yes, you have," said he, handing me one. "This will do very well.
     It is almost a facsimile."

     "And who do you expect will answer this advertisement."

     "Why, the man in the brown coat--our florid friend with the square
     toes. If he does not come himself he will send an accomplice."

     "Would he not consider it as too dangerous?"

     "Not at all. If my view of the case is correct, and I have every
     reason to believe that it is, this man would rather risk anything
     than lose the ring. According to my notion he dropped it while
     stooping over Drebber's body, and did not miss it at the time. After
     leaving the house he discovered his loss and hurried back, but found
     the police already in possession, owing to his own folly in leaving
     the candle burning. He had to pretend to be drunk in order to allay
     the suspicions which might have been aroused by his appearance at the
     gate. Now put yourself in that man's place. On thinking the matter
     over, it must have occurred to him that it was possible that he had
     lost the ring in the road after leaving the house. What would he do,
     then? He would eagerly look out for the evening papers in the hope of
     seeing it among the articles found. His eye, of course, would light
     upon this. He would be overjoyed. Why should he fear a trap? There
     would be no reason in his eyes why the finding of the ring should be
     connected with the murder. He would come. He will come. You shall see
     him within an hour."

     "And then?" I asked.

     "Oh, you can leave me to deal with him then. Have you any arms?"

     "I have my old service revolver and a few cartridges."

     "You had better clean it and load it. He will be a desperate man, and
     though I shall take him unawares, it is as well to be ready for
     anything."

     I went to my bedroom and followed his advice. When I returned with
     the pistol the table had been cleared, and Holmes was engaged in his
     favourite occupation of scraping upon his violin.

     "The plot thickens," he said, as I entered; "I have just had an
     answer to my American telegram. My view of the case is the correct
     one."

     "And that is?" I asked eagerly.

     "My fiddle would be the better for new strings," he remarked. "Put
     your pistol in your pocket. When the fellow comes speak to him in an
     ordinary way. Leave the rest to me. Don't frighten him by looking at
     him too hard."

     "It is eight o'clock now," I said, glancing at my watch.

     "Yes. He will probably be here in a few minutes. Open the door
     slightly. That will do. Now put the key on the inside. Thank you!
     This is a queer old book I picked up at a stall yesterday--De Jure
     inter Gentes--published in Latin at Liege in the Lowlands, in 1642.
     Charles' head was still firm on his shoulders when this little
     brown-backed volume was struck off."

     "Who is the printer?"

     "Philippe de Croy, whoever he may have been. On the fly-leaf, in very
     faded ink, is written 'Ex libris Guliolmi Whyte.' I wonder who
     William Whyte was. Some pragmatical seventeenth century lawyer, I
     suppose. His writing has a legal twist about it. Here comes our man,
     I think."

     As he spoke there was a sharp ring at the bell. Sherlock Holmes rose
     softly and moved his chair in the direction of the door. We heard the
     servant pass along the hall, and the sharp click of the latch as she
     opened it.

     "Does Dr. Watson live here?" asked a clear but rather harsh voice. We
     could not hear the servant's reply, but the door closed, and some one
     began to ascend the stairs. The footfall was an uncertain and
     shuffling one. A look of surprise passed over the face of my
     companion as he listened to it. It came slowly along the passage, and
     there was a feeble tap at the door.

     "Come in," I cried.

     At my summons, instead of the man of violence whom we expected, a
     very old and wrinkled woman hobbled into the apartment. She appeared
     to be dazzled by the sudden blaze of light, and after dropping a
     curtsey, she stood blinking at us with her bleared eyes and fumbling
     in her pocket with nervous, shaky fingers. I glanced at my companion,
     and his face had assumed such a disconsolate expression that it was
     all I could do to keep my countenance.

     The old crone drew out an evening paper, and pointed at our
     advertisement. "It's this as has brought me, good gentlemen," she
     said, dropping another curtsey; "a gold wedding ring in the Brixton
     Road. It belongs to my girl Sally, as was married only this time
     twelvemonth, which her husband is steward aboard a Union boat, and
     what he'd say if he comes 'ome and found her without her ring is more
     than I can think, he being short enough at the best o' times, but
     more especially when he has the drink. If it please you, she went to
     the circus last night along with--"

     "Is that her ring?" I asked.

     "The Lord be thanked!" cried the old woman; "Sally will be a glad
     woman this night. That's the ring."

     "And what may your address be?" I inquired, taking up a pencil.

     "13, Duncan Street, Houndsditch. A weary way from here."

     "The Brixton Road does not lie between any circus and Houndsditch,"
     said Sherlock Holmes sharply.

     The old woman faced round and looked keenly at him from her little
     red-rimmed eyes. "The gentleman asked me for my address," she said.
     "Sally lives in lodgings at 3, Mayfield Place, Peckham."

     "And your name is--?"

     "My name is Sawyer--her's is Dennis, which Tom Dennis married
     her--and a smart, clean lad, too, as long as he's at sea, and no
     steward in the company more thought of; but when on shore, what with
     the women and what with liquor shops--"

     "Here is your ring, Mrs. Sawyer," I interrupted, in obedience to a
     sign from my companion; "it clearly belongs to your daughter, and I
     am glad to be able to restore it to the rightful owner."

     With many mumbled blessings and protestations of gratitude the old
     crone packed it away in her pocket, and shuffled off down the stairs.
     Sherlock Holmes sprang to his feet the moment that she was gone and
     rushed into his room. He returned in a few seconds enveloped in an
     ulster and a cravat. "I'll follow her," he said, hurriedly; "she must
     be an accomplice, and will lead me to him. Wait up for me." The hall
     door had hardly slammed behind our visitor before Holmes had
     descended the stair. Looking through the window I could see her
     walking feebly along the other side, while her pursuer dogged her
     some little distance behind. "Either his whole theory is incorrect,"
     I thought to myself, "or else he will be led now to the heart of the
     mystery." There was no need for him to ask me to wait up for him, for
     I felt that sleep was impossible until I heard the result of his
     adventure.

     It was close upon nine when he set out. I had no idea how long he
     might be, but I sat stolidly puffing at my pipe and skipping over the
     pages of Henri Murger's Vie de Bohme. Ten o'clock passed, and I
     heard the footsteps of the maid as they pattered off to bed. Eleven,
     and the more stately tread of the landlady passed my door, bound for
     the same destination. It was close upon twelve before I heard the
     sharp sound of his latch-key. The instant he entered I saw by his
     face that he had not been successful. Amusement and chagrin seemed to
     be struggling for the mastery, until the former suddenly carried the
     day, and he burst into a hearty laugh.

     "I wouldn't have the Scotland Yarders know it for the world," he
     cried, dropping into his chair; "I have chaffed them so much that
     they would never have let me hear the end of it. I can afford to
     laugh, because I know that I will be even with them in the long run."

     "What is it then?" I asked.

     "Oh, I don't mind telling a story against myself. That creature had
     gone a little way when she began to limp and show every sign of being
     foot-sore. Presently she came to a halt, and hailed a four-wheeler
     which was passing. I managed to be close to her so as to hear the
     address, but I need not have been so anxious, for she sang it out
     loud enough to be heard at the other side of the street, 'Drive to
     13, Duncan Street, Houndsditch,' she cried. This begins to look
     genuine, I thought, and having seen her safely inside, I perched
     myself behind. That's an art which every detective should be an
     expert at. Well, away we rattled, and never drew rein until we
     reached the street in question. I hopped off before we came to the
     door, and strolled down the street in an easy, lounging way. I saw
     the cab pull up. The driver jumped down, and I saw him open the door
     and stand expectantly. Nothing came out though. When I reached him he
     was groping about frantically in the empty cab, and giving vent to
     the finest assorted collection of oaths that ever I listened to.
     There was no sign or trace of his passenger, and I fear it will be
     some time before he gets his fare. On inquiring at Number 13 we found
     that the house belonged to a respectable paperhanger, named Keswick,
     and that no one of the name either of Sawyer or Dennis had ever been
     heard of there."

     "You don't mean to say," I cried, in amazement, "that that tottering,
     feeble old woman was able to get out of the cab while it was in
     motion, without either you or the driver seeing her?"

     "Old woman be damned!" said Sherlock Holmes, sharply. "We were the
     old women to be so taken in. It must have been a young man, and an
     active one, too, besides being an incomparable actor. The get-up was
     inimitable. He saw that he was followed, no doubt, and used this
     means of giving me the slip. It shows that the man we are after is
     not as lonely as I imagined he was, but has friends who are ready to
     risk something for him. Now, Doctor, you are looking done-up. Take my
     advice and turn in."

     I was certainly feeling very weary, so I obeyed his injunction. I
     left Holmes seated in front of the smouldering fire, and long into
     the watches of the night I heard the low, melancholy wailings of his
     violin, and knew that he was still pondering over the strange problem
     which he had set himself to unravel.





          CHAPTER VI
          Tobias Gregson Shows What He Can Do


     The papers next day were full of the "Brixton Mystery," as they
     termed it. Each had a long account of the affair, and some had
     leaders upon it in addition. There was some information in them which
     was new to me. I still retain in my scrap-book numerous clippings and
     extracts bearing upon the case. Here is a condensation of a few of
     them:--

     The Daily Telegraph remarked that in the history of crime there had
     seldom been a tragedy which presented stranger features. The German
     name of the victim, the absence of all other motive, and the sinister
     inscription on the wall, all pointed to its perpetration by political
     refugees and revolutionists. The Socialists had many branches in
     America, and the deceased had, no doubt, infringed their unwritten
     laws, and been tracked down by them. After alluding airily to the
     Vehmgericht, aqua tofana, Carbonari, the Marchioness de Brinvilliers,
     the Darwinian theory, the principles of Malthus, and the Ratcliff
     Highway murders, the article concluded by admonishing the Government
     and advocating a closer watch over foreigners in England.

     The Standard commented upon the fact that lawless outrages of the
     sort usually occurred under a Liberal Administration. They arose from
     the unsettling of the minds of the masses, and the consequent
     weakening of all authority. The deceased was an American gentleman
     who had been residing for some weeks in the Metropolis. He had stayed
     at the boarding-house of Madame Charpentier, in Torquay Terrace,
     Camberwell. He was accompanied in his travels by his private
     secretary, Mr. Joseph Stangerson. The two bade adieu to their
     landlady upon Tuesday, the 4th inst., and departed to Euston Station
     with the avowed intention of catching the Liverpool express. They
     were afterwards seen together upon the platform. Nothing more is
     known of them until Mr. Drebber's body was, as recorded, discovered
     in an empty house in the Brixton Road, many miles from Euston. How he
     came there, or how he met his fate, are questions which are still
     involved in mystery. Nothing is known of the whereabouts of
     Stangerson. We are glad to learn that Mr. Lestrade and Mr. Gregson,
     of Scotland Yard, are both engaged upon the case, and it is
     confidently anticipated that these well-known officers will speedily
     throw light upon the matter.

     The Daily News observed that there was no doubt as to the crime being
     a political one. The despotism and hatred of Liberalism which
     animated the Continental Governments had had the effect of driving to
     our shores a number of men who might have made excellent citizens
     were they not soured by the recollection of all that they had
     undergone. Among these men there was a stringent code of honour, any
     infringement of which was punished by death. Every effort should be
     made to find the secretary, Stangerson, and to ascertain some
     particulars of the habits of the deceased. A great step had been
     gained by the discovery of the address of the house at which he had
     boarded--a result which was entirely due to the acuteness and energy
     of Mr. Gregson of Scotland Yard.

     Sherlock Holmes and I read these notices over together at breakfast,
     and they appeared to afford him considerable amusement.

     "I told you that, whatever happened, Lestrade and Gregson would be
     sure to score."

     "That depends on how it turns out."

     "Oh, bless you, it doesn't matter in the least. If the man is caught,
     it will be on account of their exertions; if he escapes, it will be
     in spite of their exertions. It's heads I win and tails you lose.
     Whatever they do, they will have followers. 'Un sot trouve toujours
     un plus sot qui l'admire.'"

     "What on earth is this?" I cried, for at this moment there came the
     pattering of many steps in the hall and on the stairs, accompanied by
     audible expressions of disgust upon the part of our landlady.

     "It's the Baker Street division of the detective police force," said
     my companion, gravely; and as he spoke there rushed into the room
     half a dozen of the dirtiest and most ragged street Arabs that ever I
     clapped eyes on.

     "'Tention!" cried Holmes, in a sharp tone, and the six dirty little
     scoundrels stood in a line like so many disreputable statuettes. "In
     future you shall send up Wiggins alone to report, and the rest of you
     must wait in the street. Have you found it, Wiggins?"

     "No, sir, we hain't," said one of the youths.

     "I hardly expected you would. You must keep on until you do. Here are
     your wages." He handed each of them a shilling. "Now, off you go, and
     come back with a better report next time."

     He waved his hand, and they scampered away downstairs like so many
     rats, and we heard their shrill voices next moment in the street.

     "There's more work to be got out of one of those little beggars than
     out of a dozen of the force," Holmes remarked. "The mere sight of an
     official-looking person seals men's lips. These youngsters, however,
     go everywhere and hear everything. They are as sharp as needles, too;
     all they want is organisation."

     "Is it on this Brixton case that you are employing them?" I asked.

     "Yes; there is a point which I wish to ascertain. It is merely a
     matter of time. Hullo! we are going to hear some news now with a
     vengeance! Here is Gregson coming down the road with beatitude
     written upon every feature of his face. Bound for us, I know. Yes, he
     is stopping. There he is!"

     There was a violent peal at the bell, and in a few seconds the
     fair-haired detective came up the stairs, three steps at a time, and
     burst into our sitting-room.

     "My dear fellow," he cried, wringing Holmes' unresponsive hand,
     "congratulate me! I have made the whole thing as clear as day."

     A shade of anxiety seemed to me to cross my companion's expressive
     face.

     "Do you mean that you are on the right track?" he asked.

     "The right track! Why, sir, we have the man under lock and key."

     "And his name is?"

     "Arthur Charpentier, sub-lieutenant in Her Majesty's navy," cried
     Gregson, pompously, rubbing his fat hands and inflating his chest.

     Sherlock Holmes gave a sigh of relief, and relaxed into a smile.

     "Take a seat, and try one of these cigars," he said. "We are anxious
     to know how you managed it. Will you have some whiskey and water?"

     "I don't mind if I do," the detective answered. "The tremendous
     exertions which I have gone through during the last day or two have
     worn me out. Not so much bodily exertion, you understand, as the
     strain upon the mind. You will appreciate that, Mr. Sherlock Holmes,
     for we are both brain-workers."

     "You do me too much honour," said Holmes, gravely. "Let us hear how
     you arrived at this most gratifying result."

     The detective seated himself in the arm-chair, and puffed
     complacently at his cigar. Then suddenly he slapped his thigh in a
     paroxysm of amusement.

     "The fun of it is," he cried, "that that fool Lestrade, who thinks
     himself so smart, has gone off upon the wrong track altogether. He is
     after the secretary Stangerson, who had no more to do with the crime
     than the babe unborn. I have no doubt that he has caught him by this
     time."

     The idea tickled Gregson so much that he laughed until he choked.

     "And how did you get your clue?"

     "Ah, I'll tell you all about it. Of course, Doctor Watson, this is
     strictly between ourselves. The first difficulty which we had to
     contend with was the finding of this American's antecedents. Some
     people would have waited until their advertisements were answered, or
     until parties came forward and volunteered information. That is not
     Tobias Gregson's way of going to work. You remember the hat beside
     the dead man?"

     "Yes," said Holmes; "by John Underwood and Sons, 129, Camberwell
     Road."

     Gregson looked quite crest-fallen.

     "I had no idea that you noticed that," he said. "Have you been
     there?"

     "No."

     "Ha!" cried Gregson, in a relieved voice; "you should never neglect a
     chance, however small it may seem."

     "To a great mind, nothing is little," remarked Holmes, sententiously.

     "Well, I went to Underwood, and asked him if he had sold a hat of
     that size and description. He looked over his books, and came on it
     at once. He had sent the hat to a Mr. Drebber, residing at
     Charpentier's Boarding Establishment, Torquay Terrace. Thus I got at
     his address."

     "Smart--very smart!" murmured Sherlock Holmes.

     "I next called upon Madame Charpentier," continued the detective. "I
     found her very pale and distressed. Her daughter was in the room,
     too--an uncommonly fine girl she is, too; she was looking red about
     the eyes and her lips trembled as I spoke to her. That didn't escape
     my notice. I began to smell a rat. You know the feeling, Mr. Sherlock
     Holmes, when you come upon the right scent--a kind of thrill in your
     nerves. 'Have you heard of the mysterious death of your late boarder
     Mr. Enoch J. Drebber, of Cleveland?' I asked.

     "The mother nodded. She didn't seem able to get out a word. The
     daughter burst into tears. I felt more than ever that these people
     knew something of the matter.

     "'At what o'clock did Mr. Drebber leave your house for the train?' I
     asked.

     "'At eight o'clock,' she said, gulping in her throat to keep down her
     agitation. 'His secretary, Mr. Stangerson, said that there were two
     trains--one at 9.15 and one at 11. He was to catch the first.'

     "'And was that the last which you saw of him?'

     "A terrible change came over the woman's face as I asked the
     question. Her features turned perfectly livid. It was some seconds
     before she could get out the single word 'Yes'--and when it did come
     it was in a husky unnatural tone.

     "There was silence for a moment, and then the daughter spoke in a
     calm clear voice.

     "'No good can ever come of falsehood, mother,' she said. 'Let us be
     frank with this gentleman. We did see Mr. Drebber again.'

     "'God forgive you!' cried Madame Charpentier, throwing up her hands
     and sinking back in her chair. 'You have murdered your brother.'

     "'Arthur would rather that we spoke the truth,' the girl answered
     firmly.

     "'You had best tell me all about it now,' I said. 'Half-confidences
     are worse than none. Besides, you do not know how much we know of
     it.'

     "'On your head be it, Alice!' cried her mother; and then, turning to
     me, 'I will tell you all, sir. Do not imagine that my agitation on
     behalf of my son arises from any fear lest he should have had a hand
     in this terrible affair. He is utterly innocent of it. My dread is,
     however, that in your eyes and in the eyes of others he may appear to
     be compromised. That however is surely impossible. His high
     character, his profession, his antecedents would all forbid it.'

     "'Your best way is to make a clean breast of the facts,' I answered.
     'Depend upon it, if your son is innocent he will be none the worse.'

     "'Perhaps, Alice, you had better leave us together,' she said, and
     her daughter withdrew. 'Now, sir,' she continued, 'I had no intention
     of telling you all this, but since my poor daughter has disclosed it
     I have no alternative. Having once decided to speak, I will tell you
     all without omitting any particular.'

     "'It is your wisest course,' said I.

     "'Mr. Drebber has been with us nearly three weeks. He and his
     secretary, Mr. Stangerson, had been travelling on the Continent. I
     noticed a "Copenhagen" label upon each of their trunks, showing that
     that had been their last stopping place. Stangerson was a quiet
     reserved man, but his employer, I am sorry to say, was far otherwise.
     He was coarse in his habits and brutish in his ways. The very night
     of his arrival he became very much the worse for drink, and, indeed,
     after twelve o'clock in the day he could hardly ever be said to be
     sober. His manners towards the maid-servants were disgustingly free
     and familiar. Worst of all, he speedily assumed the same attitude
     towards my daughter, Alice, and spoke to her more than once in a way
     which, fortunately, she is too innocent to understand. On one
     occasion he actually seized her in his arms and embraced her--an
     outrage which caused his own secretary to reproach him for his
     unmanly conduct.'

     "'But why did you stand all this,' I asked. 'I suppose that you can
     get rid of your boarders when you wish.'

     "Mrs. Charpentier blushed at my pertinent question. 'Would to God
     that I had given him notice on the very day that he came,' she said.
     'But it was a sore temptation. They were paying a pound a day
     each--fourteen pounds a week, and this is the slack season. I am a
     widow, and my boy in the Navy has cost me much. I grudged to lose the
     money. I acted for the best. This last was too much, however, and I
     gave him notice to leave on account of it. That was the reason of his
     going.'

     "'Well?'

     "'My heart grew light when I saw him drive away. My son is on leave
     just now, but I did not tell him anything of all this, for his temper
     is violent, and he is passionately fond of his sister. When I closed
     the door behind them a load seemed to be lifted from my mind. Alas,
     in less than an hour there was a ring at the bell, and I learned that
     Mr. Drebber had returned. He was much excited, and evidently the
     worse for drink. He forced his way into the room, where I was sitting
     with my daughter, and made some incoherent remark about having missed
     his train. He then turned to Alice, and before my very face, proposed
     to her that she should fly with him. "You are of age," he said, "and
     there is no law to stop you. I have money enough and to spare. Never
     mind the old girl here, but come along with me now straight away. You
     shall live like a princess." Poor Alice was so frightened that she
     shrunk away from him, but he caught her by the wrist and endeavoured
     to draw her towards the door. I screamed, and at that moment my son
     Arthur came into the room. What happened then I do not know. I heard
     oaths and the confused sounds of a scuffle. I was too terrified to
     raise my head. When I did look up I saw Arthur standing in the
     doorway laughing, with a stick in his hand. "I don't think that fine
     fellow will trouble us again," he said. "I will just go after him and
     see what he does with himself." With those words he took his hat and
     started off down the street. The next morning we heard of Mr.
     Drebber's mysterious death.'

     "This statement came from Mrs. Charpentier's lips with many gasps and
     pauses. At times she spoke so low that I could hardly catch the
     words. I made shorthand notes of all that she said, however, so that
     there should be no possibility of a mistake."

     "It's quite exciting," said Sherlock Holmes, with a yawn. "What
     happened next?"

     "When Mrs. Charpentier paused," the detective continued, "I saw that
     the whole case hung upon one point. Fixing her with my eye in a way
     which I always found effective with women, I asked her at what hour
     her son returned.

     "'I do not know,' she answered.

     "'Not know?'

     "'No; he has a latch-key, and he let himself in.'

     "'After you went to bed?'

     "'Yes.'

     "'When did you go to bed?'

     "'About eleven.'

     "'So your son was gone at least two hours?'

     "'Yes.'

     "'Possibly four or five?'

     "'Yes.'

     "'What was he doing during that time?'

     "'I do not know,' she answered, turning white to her very lips.

     "Of course after that there was nothing more to be done. I found out
     where Lieutenant Charpentier was, took two officers with me, and
     arrested him. When I touched him on the shoulder and warned him to
     come quietly with us, he answered us as bold as brass, 'I suppose you
     are arresting me for being concerned in the death of that scoundrel
     Drebber,' he said. We had said nothing to him about it, so that his
     alluding to it had a most suspicious aspect."

     "Very," said Holmes.

     "He still carried the heavy stick which the mother described him as
     having with him when he followed Drebber. It was a stout oak cudgel."

     "What is your theory, then?"

     "Well, my theory is that he followed Drebber as far as the Brixton
     Road. When there, a fresh altercation arose between them, in the
     course of which Drebber received a blow from the stick, in the pit of
     the stomach, perhaps, which killed him without leaving any mark. The
     night was so wet that no one was about, so Charpentier dragged the
     body of his victim into the empty house. As to the candle, and the
     blood, and the writing on the wall, and the ring, they may all be so
     many tricks to throw the police on to the wrong scent."

     "Well done!" said Holmes in an encouraging voice. "Really, Gregson,
     you are getting along. We shall make something of you yet."

     "I flatter myself that I have managed it rather neatly," the
     detective answered proudly. "The young man volunteered a statement,
     in which he said that after following Drebber some time, the latter
     perceived him, and took a cab in order to get away from him. On his
     way home he met an old shipmate, and took a long walk with him. On
     being asked where this old shipmate lived, he was unable to give any
     satisfactory reply. I think the whole case fits together uncommonly
     well. What amuses me is to think of Lestrade, who had started off
     upon the wrong scent. I am afraid he won't make much of--Why, by
     Jove, here's the very man himself!"

     It was indeed Lestrade, who had ascended the stairs while we were
     talking, and who now entered the room. The assurance and jauntiness
     which generally marked his demeanour and dress were, however,
     wanting. His face was disturbed and troubled, while his clothes were
     disarranged and untidy. He had evidently come with the intention of
     consulting with Sherlock Holmes, for on perceiving his colleague he
     appeared to be embarrassed and put out. He stood in the centre of the
     room, fumbling nervously with his hat and uncertain what to do. "This
     is a most extraordinary case," he said at last--"a most
     incomprehensible affair."

     "Ah, you find it so, Mr. Lestrade!" cried Gregson, triumphantly. "I
     thought you would come to that conclusion. Have you managed to find
     the Secretary, Mr. Joseph Stangerson?"

     "The Secretary, Mr. Joseph Stangerson," said Lestrade gravely, "was
     murdered at Halliday's Private Hotel about six o'clock this morning."
     





          CHAPTER VII
          Light In The Darkness


     The intelligence with which Lestrade greeted us was so momentous and
     so unexpected, that we were all three fairly dumfoundered. Gregson
     sprang out of his chair and upset the remainder of his whiskey and
     water. I stared in silence at Sherlock Holmes, whose lips were
     compressed and his brows drawn down over his eyes.

     "Stangerson too!" he muttered. "The plot thickens."

     "It was quite thick enough before," grumbled Lestrade, taking a
     chair. "I seem to have dropped into a sort of council of war."

     "Are you--are you sure of this piece of intelligence?" stammered
     Gregson.

     "I have just come from his room," said Lestrade. "I was the first to
     discover what had occurred."

     "We have been hearing Gregson's view of the matter," Holmes observed.
     "Would you mind letting us know what you have seen and done?"

     "I have no objection," Lestrade answered, seating himself. "I freely
     confess that I was of the opinion that Stangerson was concerned in
     the death of Drebber. This fresh development has shown me that I was
     completely mistaken. Full of the one idea, I set myself to find out
     what had become of the Secretary. They had been seen together at
     Euston Station about half-past eight on the evening of the third. At
     two in the morning Drebber had been found in the Brixton Road. The
     question which confronted me was to find out how Stangerson had been
     employed between 8.30 and the time of the crime, and what had become
     of him afterwards. I telegraphed to Liverpool, giving a description
     of the man, and warning them to keep a watch upon the American boats.
     I then set to work calling upon all the hotels and lodging-houses in
     the vicinity of Euston. You see, I argued that if Drebber and his
     companion had become separated, the natural course for the latter
     would be to put up somewhere in the vicinity for the night, and then
     to hang about the station again next morning."

     "They would be likely to agree on some meeting-place beforehand,"
     remarked Holmes.

     "So it proved. I spent the whole of yesterday evening in making
     enquiries entirely without avail. This morning I began very early,
     and at eight o'clock I reached Halliday's Private Hotel, in Little
     George Street. On my enquiry as to whether a Mr. Stangerson was
     living there, they at once answered me in the affirmative.

     "'No doubt you are the gentleman whom he was expecting,' they said.
     'He has been waiting for a gentleman for two days.'

     "'Where is he now?' I asked.

     "'He is upstairs in bed. He wished to be called at nine.'

     "'I will go up and see him at once,' I said.

     "It seemed to me that my sudden appearance might shake his nerves and
     lead him to say something unguarded. The Boots volunteered to show me
     the room: it was on the second floor, and there was a small corridor
     leading up to it. The Boots pointed out the door to me, and was about
     to go downstairs again when I saw something that made me feel
     sickish, in spite of my twenty years' experience. From under the door
     there curled a little red ribbon of blood, which had meandered across
     the passage and formed a little pool along the skirting at the other
     side. I gave a cry, which brought the Boots back. He nearly fainted
     when he saw it. The door was locked on the inside, but we put our
     shoulders to it, and knocked it in. The window of the room was open,
     and beside the window, all huddled up, lay the body of a man in his
     nightdress. He was quite dead, and had been for some time, for his
     limbs were rigid and cold. When we turned him over, the Boots
     recognized him at once as being the same gentleman who had engaged
     the room under the name of Joseph Stangerson. The cause of death was
     a deep stab in the left side, which must have penetrated the heart.
     And now comes the strangest part of the affair. What do you suppose
     was above the murdered man?"

     I felt a creeping of the flesh, and a presentiment of coming horror,
     even before Sherlock Holmes answered.

     "The word RACHE, written in letters of blood," he said.

     "That was it," said Lestrade, in an awe-struck voice; and we were all
     silent for a while.

     There was something so methodical and so incomprehensible about the
     deeds of this unknown assassin, that it imparted a fresh ghastliness
     to his crimes. My nerves, which were steady enough on the field of
     battle tingled as I thought of it.

     "The man was seen," continued Lestrade. "A milk boy, passing on his
     way to the dairy, happened to walk down the lane which leads from the
     mews at the back of the hotel. He noticed that a ladder, which
     usually lay there, was raised against one of the windows of the
     second floor, which was wide open. After passing, he looked back and
     saw a man descend the ladder. He came down so quietly and openly that
     the boy imagined him to be some carpenter or joiner at work in the
     hotel. He took no particular notice of him, beyond thinking in his
     own mind that it was early for him to be at work. He has an
     impression that the man was tall, had a reddish face, and was dressed
     in a long, brownish coat. He must have stayed in the room some little
     time after the murder, for we found blood-stained water in the basin,
     where he had washed his hands, and marks on the sheets where he had
     deliberately wiped his knife."

     I glanced at Holmes on hearing the description of the murderer, which
     tallied so exactly with his own. There was, however, no trace of
     exultation or satisfaction upon his face.

     "Did you find nothing in the room which could furnish a clue to the
     murderer?" he asked.

     "Nothing. Stangerson had Drebber's purse in his pocket, but it seems
     that this was usual, as he did all the paying. There was eighty odd
     pounds in it, but nothing had been taken. Whatever the motives of
     these extraordinary crimes, robbery is certainly not one of them.
     There were no papers or memoranda in the murdered man's pocket,
     except a single telegram, dated from Cleveland about a month ago, and
     containing the words, 'J. H. is in Europe.' There was no name
     appended to this message."

     "And there was nothing else?" Holmes asked.

     "Nothing of any importance. The man's novel, with which he had read
     himself to sleep was lying upon the bed, and his pipe was on a chair
     beside him. There was a glass of water on the table, and on the
     window-sill a small chip ointment box containing a couple of pills."

     Sherlock Holmes sprang from his chair with an exclamation of delight.

     "The last link," he cried, exultantly. "My case is complete."

     The two detectives stared at him in amazement.

     "I have now in my hands," my companion said, confidently, "all the
     threads which have formed such a tangle. There are, of course,
     details to be filled in, but I am as certain of all the main facts,
     from the time that Drebber parted from Stangerson at the station, up
     to the discovery of the body of the latter, as if I had seen them
     with my own eyes. I will give you a proof of my knowledge. Could you
     lay your hand upon those pills?"

     "I have them," said Lestrade, producing a small white box; "I took
     them and the purse and the telegram, intending to have them put in a
     place of safety at the Police Station. It was the merest chance my
     taking these pills, for I am bound to say that I do not attach any
     importance to them."

     "Give them here," said Holmes. "Now, Doctor," turning to me, "are
     those ordinary pills?"

     They certainly were not. They were of a pearly grey colour, small,
     round, and almost transparent against the light. "From their
     lightness and transparency, I should imagine that they are soluble in
     water," I remarked.

     "Precisely so," answered Holmes. "Now would you mind going down and
     fetching that poor little devil of a terrier which has been bad so
     long, and which the landlady wanted you to put out of its pain
     yesterday."

     I went downstairs and carried the dog upstair in my arms. It's
     laboured breathing and glazing eye showed that it was not far from
     its end. Indeed, its snow-white muzzle proclaimed that it had already
     exceeded the usual term of canine existence. I placed it upon a
     cushion on the rug.

     "I will now cut one of these pills in two," said Holmes, and drawing
     his penknife he suited the action to the word. "One half we return
     into the box for future purposes. The other half I will place in this
     wine glass, in which is a teaspoonful of water. You perceive that our
     friend, the Doctor, is right, and that it readily dissolves."

     "This may be very interesting," said Lestrade, in the injured tone of
     one who suspects that he is being laughed at, "I cannot see, however,
     what it has to do with the death of Mr. Joseph Stangerson."

     "Patience, my friend, patience! You will find in time that it has
     everything to do with it. I shall now add a little milk to make the
     mixture palatable, and on presenting it to the dog we find that he
     laps it up readily enough."

     As he spoke he turned the contents of the wine glass into a saucer
     and placed it in front of the terrier, who speedily licked it dry.
     Sherlock Holmes' earnest demeanour had so far convinced us that we
     all sat in silence, watching the animal intently, and expecting some
     startling effect. None such appeared, however. The dog continued to
     lie stretched upon the cushion, breathing in a laboured way, but
     apparently neither the better nor the worse for its draught.

     Holmes had taken out his watch, and as minute followed minute without
     result, an expression of the utmost chagrin and disappointment
     appeared upon his features. He gnawed his lip, drummed his fingers
     upon the table, and showed every other symptom of acute impatience.
     So great was his emotion, that I felt sincerely sorry for him, while
     the two detectives smiled derisively, by no means displeased at this
     check which he had met.

     "It can't be a coincidence," he cried, at last springing from his
     chair and pacing wildly up and down the room; "it is impossible that
     it should be a mere coincidence. The very pills which I suspected in
     the case of Drebber are actually found after the death of Stangerson.
     And yet they are inert. What can it mean? Surely my whole chain of
     reasoning cannot have been false. It is impossible! And yet this
     wretched dog is none the worse. Ah, I have it! I have it!" With a
     perfect shriek of delight he rushed to the box, cut the other pill in
     two, dissolved it, added milk, and presented it to the terrier. The
     unfortunate creature's tongue seemed hardly to have been moistened in
     it before it gave a convulsive shiver in every limb, and lay as rigid
     and lifeless as if it had been struck by lightning.

     Sherlock Holmes drew a long breath, and wiped the perspiration from
     his forehead. "I should have more faith," he said; "I ought to know
     by this time that when a fact appears to be opposed to a long train
     of deductions, it invariably proves to be capable of bearing some
     other interpretation. Of the two pills in that box one was of the
     most deadly poison, and the other was entirely harmless. I ought to
     have known that before ever I saw the box at all."

     This last statement appeared to me to be so startling, that I could
     hardly believe that he was in his sober senses. There was the dead
     dog, however, to prove that his conjecture had been correct. It
     seemed to me that the mists in my own mind were gradually clearing
     away, and I began to have a dim, vague perception of the truth.

     "All this seems strange to you," continued Holmes, "because you
     failed at the beginning of the inquiry to grasp the importance of the
     single real clue which was presented to you. I had the good fortune
     to seize upon that, and everything which has occurred since then has
     served to confirm my original supposition, and, indeed, was the
     logical sequence of it. Hence things which have perplexed you and
     made the case more obscure, have served to enlighten me and to
     strengthen my conclusions. It is a mistake to confound strangeness
     with mystery. The most commonplace crime is often the most mysterious
     because it presents no new or special features from which deductions
     may be drawn. This murder would have been infinitely more difficult
     to unravel had the body of the victim been simply found lying in the
     roadway without any of those outr?and sensational accompaniments
     which have rendered it remarkable. These strange details, far from
     making the case more difficult, have really had the effect of making
     it less so."

     Mr. Gregson, who had listened to this address with considerable
     impatience, could contain himself no longer. "Look here, Mr. Sherlock
     Holmes," he said, "we are all ready to acknowledge that you are a
     smart man, and that you have your own methods of working. We want
     something more than mere theory and preaching now, though. It is a
     case of taking the man. I have made my case out, and it seems I was
     wrong. Young Charpentier could not have been engaged in this second
     affair. Lestrade went after his man, Stangerson, and it appears that
     he was wrong too. You have thrown out hints here, and hints there,
     and seem to know more than we do, but the time has come when we feel
     that we have a right to ask you straight how much you do know of the
     business. Can you name the man who did it?"

     "I cannot help feeling that Gregson is right, sir," remarked
     Lestrade. "We have both tried, and we have both failed. You have
     remarked more than once since I have been in the room that you had
     all the evidence which you require. Surely you will not withhold it
     any longer."

     "Any delay in arresting the assassin," I observed, "might give him
     time to perpetrate some fresh atrocity."

     Thus pressed by us all, Holmes showed signs of irresolution. He
     continued to walk up and down the room with his head sunk on his
     chest and his brows drawn down, as was his habit when lost in
     thought.

     "There will be no more murders," he said at last, stopping abruptly
     and facing us. "You can put that consideration out of the question.
     You have asked me if I know the name of the assassin. I do. The mere
     knowing of his name is a small thing, however, compared with the
     power of laying our hands upon him. This I expect very shortly to do.
     I have good hopes of managing it through my own arrangements; but it
     is a thing which needs delicate handling, for we have a shrewd and
     desperate man to deal with, who is supported, as I have had occasion
     to prove, by another who is as clever as himself. As long as this man
     has no idea that anyone can have a clue there is some chance of
     securing him; but if he had the slightest suspicion, he would change
     his name, and vanish in an instant among the four million inhabitants
     of this great city. Without meaning to hurt either of your feelings,
     I am bound to say that I consider these men to be more than a match
     for the official force, and that is why I have not asked your
     assistance. If I fail I shall, of course, incur all the blame due to
     this omission; but that I am prepared for. At present I am ready to
     promise that the instant that I can communicate with you without
     endangering my own combinations, I shall do so."

     Gregson and Lestrade seemed to be far from satisfied by this
     assurance, or by the depreciating allusion to the detective police.
     The former had flushed up to the roots of his flaxen hair, while the
     other's beady eyes glistened with curiosity and resentment. Neither
     of them had time to speak, however, before there was a tap at the
     door, and the spokesman of the street Arabs, young Wiggins,
     introduced his insignificant and unsavoury person.

     "Please, sir," he said, touching his forelock, "I have the cab
     downstairs."

     "Good boy," said Holmes, blandly. "Why don't you introduce this
     pattern at Scotland Yard?" he continued, taking a pair of steel
     handcuffs from a drawer. "See how beautifully the spring works. They
     fasten in an instant."

     "The old pattern is good enough," remarked Lestrade, "if we can only
     find the man to put them on."

     "Very good, very good," said Holmes, smiling. "The cabman may as well
     help me with my boxes. Just ask him to step up, Wiggins."

     I was surprised to find my companion speaking as though he were about
     to set out on a journey, since he had not said anything to me about
     it. There was a small portmanteau in the room, and this he pulled out
     and began to strap. He was busily engaged at it when the cabman
     entered the room.

     "Just give me a help with this buckle, cabman," he said, kneeling
     over his task, and never turning his head.

     The fellow came forward with a somewhat sullen, defiant air, and put
     down his hands to assist. At that instant there was a sharp click,
     the jangling of metal, and Sherlock Holmes sprang to his feet again.

     "Gentlemen," he cried, with flashing eyes, "let me introduce you to
     Mr. Jefferson Hope, the murderer of Enoch Drebber and of Joseph
     Stangerson."

     The whole thing occurred in a moment--so quickly that I had no time
     to realize it. I have a vivid recollection of that instant, of
     Holmes' triumphant expression and the ring of his voice, of the
     cabman's dazed, savage face, as he glared at the glittering
     handcuffs, which had appeared as if by magic upon his wrists. For a
     second or two we might have been a group of statues. Then, with an
     inarticulate roar of fury, the prisoner wrenched himself free from
     Holmes's grasp, and hurled himself through the window. Woodwork and
     glass gave way before him; but before he got quite through, Gregson,
     Lestrade, and Holmes sprang upon him like so many staghounds. He was
     dragged back into the room, and then commenced a terrific conflict.
     So powerful and so fierce was he, that the four of us were shaken off
     again and again. He appeared to have the convulsive strength of a man
     in an epileptic fit. His face and hands were terribly mangled by his
     passage through the glass, but loss of blood had no effect in
     diminishing his resistance. It was not until Lestrade succeeded in
     getting his hand inside his neckcloth and half-strangling him that we
     made him realize that his struggles were of no avail; and even then
     we felt no security until we had pinioned his feet as well as his
     hands. That done, we rose to our feet breathless and panting.

     "We have his cab," said Sherlock Holmes. "It will serve to take him
     to Scotland Yard. And now, gentlemen," he continued, with a pleasant
     smile, "we have reached the end of our little mystery. You are very
     welcome to put any questions that you like to me now, and there is no
     danger that I will refuse to answer them."









                                      PART II

                           The Country of the Saints.





          CHAPTER I
          On The Great Alkali Plain


     In the central portion of the great North American Continent there
     lies an arid and repulsive desert, which for many a long year served
     as a barrier against the advance of civilisation. From the Sierra
     Nevada to Nebraska, and from the Yellowstone River in the north to
     the Colorado upon the south, is a region of desolation and silence.
     Nor is Nature always in one mood throughout this grim district. It
     comprises snow-capped and lofty mountains, and dark and gloomy
     valleys. There are swift-flowing rivers which dash through jagged
     caons; and there are enormous plains, which in winter are white with
     snow, and in summer are grey with the saline alkali dust. They all
     preserve, however, the common characteristics of barrenness,
     inhospitality, and misery.

     There are no inhabitants of this land of despair. A band of Pawnees
     or of Blackfeet may occasionally traverse it in order to reach other
     hunting-grounds, but the hardiest of the braves are glad to lose
     sight of those awesome plains, and to find themselves once more upon
     their prairies. The coyote skulks among the scrub, the buzzard flaps
     heavily through the air, and the clumsy grizzly bear lumbers through
     the dark ravines, and picks up such sustenance as it can amongst the
     rocks. These are the sole dwellers in the wilderness.

     In the whole world there can be no more dreary view than that from
     the northern slope of the Sierra Blanco. As far as the eye can reach
     stretches the great flat plain-land, all dusted over with patches of
     alkali, and intersected by clumps of the dwarfish chaparral bushes.
     On the extreme verge of the horizon lie a long chain of mountain
     peaks, with their rugged summits flecked with snow. In this great
     stretch of country there is no sign of life, nor of anything
     appertaining to life. There is no bird in the steel-blue heaven, no
     movement upon the dull, grey earth--above all, there is absolute
     silence. Listen as one may, there is no shadow of a sound in all that
     mighty wilderness; nothing but silence--complete and heart-subduing
     silence.

     It has been said there is nothing appertaining to life upon the broad
     plain. That is hardly true. Looking down from the Sierra Blanco, one
     sees a pathway traced out across the desert, which winds away and is
     lost in the extreme distance. It is rutted with wheels and trodden
     down by the feet of many adventurers. Here and there there are
     scattered white objects which glisten in the sun, and stand out
     against the dull deposit of alkali. Approach, and examine them! They
     are bones: some large and coarse, others smaller and more delicate.
     The former have belonged to oxen, and the latter to men. For fifteen
     hundred miles one may trace this ghastly caravan route by these
     scattered remains of those who had fallen by the wayside.

     Looking down on this very scene, there stood upon the fourth of May,
     eighteen hundred and forty-seven, a solitary traveller. His
     appearance was such that he might have been the very genius or demon
     of the region. An observer would have found it difficult to say
     whether he was nearer to forty or to sixty. His face was lean and
     haggard, and the brown parchment-like skin was drawn tightly over the
     projecting bones; his long, brown hair and beard were all flecked and
     dashed with white; his eyes were sunken in his head, and burned with
     an unnatural lustre; while the hand which grasped his rifle was
     hardly more fleshy than that of a skeleton. As he stood, he leaned
     upon his weapon for support, and yet his tall figure and the massive
     framework of his bones suggested a wiry and vigorous constitution.
     His gaunt face, however, and his clothes, which hung so baggily over
     his shrivelled limbs, proclaimed what it was that gave him that
     senile and decrepit appearance. The man was dying--dying from hunger
     and from thirst.

     He had toiled painfully down the ravine, and on to this little
     elevation, in the vain hope of seeing some signs of water. Now the
     great salt plain stretched before his eyes, and the distant belt of
     savage mountains, without a sign anywhere of plant or tree, which
     might indicate the presence of moisture. In all that broad landscape
     there was no gleam of hope. North, and east, and west he looked with
     wild questioning eyes, and then he realised that his wanderings had
     come to an end, and that there, on that barren crag, he was about to
     die. "Why not here, as well as in a feather bed, twenty years hence,"
     he muttered, as he seated himself in the shelter of a boulder.

     Before sitting down, he had deposited upon the ground his useless
     rifle, and also a large bundle tied up in a grey shawl, which he had
     carried slung over his right shoulder. It appeared to be somewhat too
     heavy for his strength, for in lowering it, it came down on the
     ground with some little violence. Instantly there broke from the grey
     parcel a little moaning cry, and from it there protruded a small,
     scared face, with very bright brown eyes, and two little speckled,
     dimpled fists.

     "You've hurt me!" said a childish voice reproachfully.

     "Have I though," the man answered penitently, "I didn't go for to do
     it." As he spoke he unwrapped the grey shawl and extricated a pretty
     little girl of about five years of age, whose dainty shoes and smart
     pink frock with its little linen apron all bespoke a mother's care.
     The child was pale and wan, but her healthy arms and legs showed that
     she had suffered less than her companion.

     "How is it now?" he answered anxiously, for she was still rubbing the
     towsy golden curls which covered the back of her head.

     "Kiss it and make it well," she said, with perfect gravity, shoving
     the injured part up to him. "That's what mother used to do. Where's
     mother?"

     "Mother's gone. I guess you'll see her before long."

     "Gone, eh!" said the little girl. "Funny, she didn't say good-bye;
     she 'most always did if she was just goin' over to Auntie's for tea,
     and now she's been away three days. Say, it's awful dry, ain't it?
     Ain't there no water, nor nothing to eat?"

     "No, there ain't nothing, dearie. You'll just need to be patient
     awhile, and then you'll be all right. Put your head up agin me like
     that, and then you'll feel bullier. It ain't easy to talk when your
     lips is like leather, but I guess I'd best let you know how the cards
     lie. What's that you've got?"

     "Pretty things! fine things!" cried the little girl enthusiastically,
     holding up two glittering fragments of mica. "When we goes back to
     home I'll give them to brother Bob."

     "You'll see prettier things than them soon," said the man
     confidently. "You just wait a bit. I was going to tell you
     though--you remember when we left the river?"

     "Oh, yes."

     "Well, we reckoned we'd strike another river soon, d'ye see. But
     there was somethin' wrong; compasses, or map, or somethin', and it
     didn't turn up. Water ran out. Just except a little drop for the
     likes of you and--and--"

     "And you couldn't wash yourself," interrupted his companion gravely,
     staring up at his grimy visage.

     "No, nor drink. And Mr. Bender, he was the fust to go, and then
     Indian Pete, and then Mrs. McGregor, and then Johnny Hones, and then,
     dearie, your mother."

     "Then mother's a deader too," cried the little girl dropping her face
     in her pinafore and sobbing bitterly.

     "Yes, they all went except you and me. Then I thought there was some
     chance of water in this direction, so I heaved you over my shoulder
     and we tramped it together. It don't seem as though we've improved
     matters. There's an almighty small chance for us now!"

     "Do you mean that we are going to die too?" asked the child, checking
     her sobs, and raising her tear-stained face.

     "I guess that's about the size of it."

     "Why didn't you say so before?" she said, laughing gleefully. "You
     gave me such a fright. Why, of course, now as long as we die we'll be
     with mother again."

     "Yes, you will, dearie."

     "And you too. I'll tell her how awful good you've been. I'll bet she
     meets us at the door of Heaven with a big pitcher of water, and a lot
     of buckwheat cakes, hot, and toasted on both sides, like Bob and me
     was fond of. How long will it be first?"

     "I don't know--not very long." The man's eyes were fixed upon the
     northern horizon. In the blue vault of the heaven there had appeared
     three little specks which increased in size every moment, so rapidly
     did they approach. They speedily resolved themselves into three large
     brown birds, which circled over the heads of the two wanderers, and
     then settled upon some rocks which overlooked them. They were
     buzzards, the vultures of the west, whose coming is the forerunner of
     death.

     "Cocks and hens," cried the little girl gleefully, pointing at their
     ill-omened forms, and clapping her hands to make them rise. "Say, did
     God make this country?"

     "Of course He did," said her companion, rather startled by this
     unexpected question.

     "He made the country down in Illinois, and He made the Missouri," the
     little girl continued. "I guess somebody else made the country in
     these parts. It's not nearly so well done. They forgot the water and
     the trees."

     "What would ye think of offering up prayer?" the man asked
     diffidently.

     "It ain't night yet," she answered.

     "It don't matter. It ain't quite regular, but He won't mind that, you
     bet. You say over them ones that you used to say every night in the
     waggon when we was on the Plains."

     "Why don't you say some yourself?" the child asked, with wondering
     eyes.

     "I disremember them," he answered. "I hain't said none since I was
     half the height o' that gun. I guess it's never too late. You say
     them out, and I'll stand by and come in on the choruses."

     "Then you'll need to kneel down, and me too," she said, laying the
     shawl out for that purpose. "You've got to put your hands up like
     this. It makes you feel kind o' good."

     It was a strange sight had there been anything but the buzzards to
     see it. Side by side on the narrow shawl knelt the two wanderers, the
     little prattling child and the reckless, hardened adventurer. Her
     chubby face, and his haggard, angular visage were both turned up to
     the cloudless heaven in heartfelt entreaty to that dread being with
     whom they were face to face, while the two voices--the one thin and
     clear, the other deep and harsh--united in the entreaty for mercy and
     forgiveness. The prayer finished, they resumed their seat in the
     shadow of the boulder until the child fell asleep, nestling upon the
     broad breast of her protector. He watched over her slumber for some
     time, but Nature proved to be too strong for him. For three days and
     three nights he had allowed himself neither rest nor repose. Slowly
     the eyelids drooped over the tired eyes, and the head sunk lower and
     lower upon the breast, until the man's grizzled beard was mixed with
     the gold tresses of his companion, and both slept the same deep and
     dreamless slumber.

     Had the wanderer remained awake for another half hour a strange sight
     would have met his eyes. Far away on the extreme verge of the alkali
     plain there rose up a little spray of dust, very slight at first, and
     hardly to be distinguished from the mists of the distance, but
     gradually growing higher and broader until it formed a solid,
     well-defined cloud. This cloud continued to increase in size until it
     became evident that it could only be raised by a great multitude of
     moving creatures. In more fertile spots the observer would have come
     to the conclusion that one of those great herds of bisons which graze
     upon the prairie land was approaching him. This was obviously
     impossible in these arid wilds. As the whirl of dust drew nearer to
     the solitary bluff upon which the two castaways were reposing, the
     canvas-covered tilts of waggons and the figures of armed horsemen
     began to show up through the haze, and the apparition revealed itself
     as being a great caravan upon its journey for the West. But what a
     caravan! When the head of it had reached the base of the mountains,
     the rear was not yet visible on the horizon. Right across the
     enormous plain stretched the straggling array, waggons and carts, men
     on horseback, and men on foot. Innumerable women who staggered along
     under burdens, and children who toddled beside the waggons or peeped
     out from under the white coverings. This was evidently no ordinary
     party of immigrants, but rather some nomad people who had been
     compelled from stress of circumstances to seek themselves a new
     country. There rose through the clear air a confused clattering and
     rumbling from this great mass of humanity, with the creaking of
     wheels and the neighing of horses. Loud as it was, it was not
     sufficient to rouse the two tired wayfarers above them.

     At the head of the column there rode a score or more of grave
     ironfaced men, clad in sombre homespun garments and armed with
     rifles. On reaching the base of the bluff they halted, and held a
     short council among themselves.

     "The wells are to the right, my brothers," said one, a hard-lipped,
     clean-shaven man with grizzly hair.

     "To the right of the Sierra Blanco--so we shall reach the Rio
     Grande," said another.

     "Fear not for water," cried a third. "He who could draw it from the
     rocks will not now abandon His own chosen people."

     "Amen! Amen!" responded the whole party.

     They were about to resume their journey when one of the youngest and
     keenest-eyed uttered an exclamation and pointed up at the rugged crag
     above them. From its summit there fluttered a little wisp of pink,
     showing up hard and bright against the grey rocks behind. At the
     sight there was a general reining up of horses and unslinging of
     guns, while fresh horsemen came galloping up to reinforce the
     vanguard. The word "Redskins" was on every lip.

     "There can't be any number of Injuns here," said the elderly man who
     appeared to be in command. "We have passed the Pawnees, and there are
     no other tribes until we cross the great mountains."

     "Shall I go forward and see, Brother Stangerson," asked one of the
     band.

     "And I," "and I," cried a dozen voices.

     "Leave your horses below and we will await you here," the Elder
     answered. In a moment the young fellows had dismounted, fastened
     their horses, and were ascending the precipitous slope which led up
     to the object which had excited their curiosity. They advanced
     rapidly and noiselessly, with the confidence and dexterity of
     practised scouts. The watchers from the plain below could see them
     flit from rock to rock until their figures stood out against the
     skyline. The young man who had first given the alarm was leading
     them. Suddenly his followers saw him throw up his hands, as though
     overcome with astonishment, and on joining him they were affected in
     the same way by the sight which met their eyes.

     On the little plateau which crowned the barren hill there stood a
     single giant boulder, and against this boulder there lay a tall man,
     long-bearded and hard-featured, but of an excessive thinness. His
     placid face and regular breathing showed that he was fast asleep.
     Beside him lay a little child, with her round white arms encircling
     his brown sinewy neck, and her golden haired head resting upon the
     breast of his velveteen tunic. Her rosy lips were parted, showing the
     regular line of snow-white teeth within, and a playful smile played
     over her infantile features. Her plump little white legs terminating
     in white socks and neat shoes with shining buckles, offered a strange
     contrast to the long shrivelled members of her companion. On the
     ledge of rock above this strange couple there stood three solemn
     buzzards, who, at the sight of the new comers uttered raucous screams
     of disappointment and flapped sullenly away.

     The cries of the foul birds awoke the two sleepers who stared about
     them in bewilderment. The man staggered to his feet and looked down
     upon the plain which had been so desolate when sleep had overtaken
     him, and which was now traversed by this enormous body of men and of
     beasts. His face assumed an expression of incredulity as he gazed,
     and he passed his boney hand over his eyes. "This is what they call
     delirium, I guess," he muttered. The child stood beside him, holding
     on to the skirt of his coat, and said nothing but looked all round
     her with the wondering questioning gaze of childhood.

     The rescuing party were speedily able to convince the two castaways
     that their appearance was no delusion. One of them seized the little
     girl, and hoisted her upon his shoulder, while two others supported
     her gaunt companion, and assisted him towards the waggons.

     "My name is John Ferrier," the wanderer explained; "me and that
     little un are all that's left o' twenty-one people. The rest is all
     dead o' thirst and hunger away down in the south."

     "Is she your child?" asked someone.

     "I guess she is now," the other cried, defiantly; "she's mine 'cause
     I saved her. No man will take her from me. She's Lucy Ferrier from
     this day on. Who are you, though?" he continued, glancing with
     curiosity at his stalwart, sunburned rescuers; "there seems to be a
     powerful lot of ye."

     "Nigh upon ten thousand," said one of the young men; "we are the
     persecuted children of God--the chosen of the Angel Merona."

     "I never heard tell on him," said the wanderer. "He appears to have
     chosen a fair crowd of ye."

     "Do not jest at that which is sacred," said the other sternly. "We
     are of those who believe in those sacred writings, drawn in Egyptian
     letters on plates of beaten gold, which were handed unto the holy
     Joseph Smith at Palmyra. We have come from Nauvoo, in the State of
     Illinois, where we had founded our temple. We have come to seek a
     refuge from the violent man and from the godless, even though it be
     the heart of the desert."

     The name of Nauvoo evidently recalled recollections to John Ferrier.
     "I see," he said, "you are the Mormons."

     "We are the Mormons," answered his companions with one voice.

     "And where are you going?"

     "We do not know. The hand of God is leading us under the person of
     our Prophet. You must come before him. He shall say what is to be
     done with you."

     They had reached the base of the hill by this time, and were
     surrounded by crowds of the pilgrims--pale-faced meek-looking women,
     strong laughing children, and anxious earnest-eyed men. Many were the
     cries of astonishment and of commiseration which arose from them when
     they perceived the youth of one of the strangers and the destitution
     of the other. Their escort did not halt, however, but pushed on,
     followed by a great crowd of Mormons, until they reached a waggon,
     which was conspicuous for its great size and for the gaudiness and
     smartness of its appearance. Six horses were yoked to it, whereas the
     others were furnished with two, or, at most, four a-piece. Beside the
     driver there sat a man who could not have been more than thirty years
     of age, but whose massive head and resolute expression marked him as
     a leader. He was reading a brown-backed volume, but as the crowd
     approached he laid it aside, and listened attentively to an account
     of the episode. Then he turned to the two castaways.

     "If we take you with us," he said, in solemn words, "it can only be
     as believers in our own creed. We shall have no wolves in our fold.
     Better far that your bones should bleach in this wilderness than that
     you should prove to be that little speck of decay which in time
     corrupts the whole fruit. Will you come with us on these terms?"

     "Guess I'll come with you on any terms," said Ferrier, with such
     emphasis that the grave Elders could not restrain a smile. The leader
     alone retained his stern, impressive expression.

     "Take him, Brother Stangerson," he said, "give him food and drink,
     and the child likewise. Let it be your task also to teach him our
     holy creed. We have delayed long enough. Forward! On, on to Zion!"

     "On, on to Zion!" cried the crowd of Mormons, and the words rippled
     down the long caravan, passing from mouth to mouth until they died
     away in a dull murmur in the far distance. With a cracking of whips
     and a creaking of wheels the great waggons got into motion, and soon
     the whole caravan was winding along once more. The Elder to whose
     care the two waifs had been committed, led them to his waggon, where
     a meal was already awaiting them.

     "You shall remain here," he said. "In a few days you will have
     recovered from your fatigues. In the meantime, remember that now and
     forever you are of our religion. Brigham Young has said it, and he
     has spoken with the voice of Joseph Smith, which is the voice of
     God."





          CHAPTER II
          The Flower Of Utah


     This is not the place to commemorate the trials and privations
     endured by the immigrant Mormons before they came to their final
     haven. From the shores of the Mississippi to the western slopes of
     the Rocky Mountains they had struggled on with a constancy almost
     unparalleled in history. The savage man, and the savage beast,
     hunger, thirst, fatigue, and disease--every impediment which Nature
     could place in the way--had all been overcome with Anglo-Saxon
     tenacity. Yet the long journey and the accumulated terrors had shaken
     the hearts of the stoutest among them. There was not one who did not
     sink upon his knees in heartfelt prayer when they saw the broad
     valley of Utah bathed in the sunlight beneath them, and learned from
     the lips of their leader that this was the promised land, and that
     these virgin acres were to be theirs for evermore.

     Young speedily proved himself to be a skilful administrator as well
     as a resolute chief. Maps were drawn and charts prepared, in which
     the future city was sketched out. All around farms were apportioned
     and allotted in proportion to the standing of each individual. The
     tradesman was put to his trade and the artisan to his calling. In the
     town streets and squares sprang up, as if by magic. In the country
     there was draining and hedging, planting and clearing, until the next
     summer saw the whole country golden with the wheat crop. Everything
     prospered in the strange settlement. Above all, the great temple
     which they had erected in the centre of the city grew ever taller and
     larger. From the first blush of dawn until the closing of the
     twilight, the clatter of the hammer and the rasp of the saw was never
     absent from the monument which the immigrants erected to Him who had
     led them safe through many dangers.

     The two castaways, John Ferrier and the little girl who had shared
     his fortunes and had been adopted as his daughter, accompanied the
     Mormons to the end of their great pilgrimage. Little Lucy Ferrier was
     borne along pleasantly enough in Elder Stangerson's waggon, a retreat
     which she shared with the Mormon's three wives and with his son, a
     headstrong forward boy of twelve. Having rallied, with the elasticity
     of childhood, from the shock caused by her mother's death, she soon
     became a pet with the women, and reconciled herself to this new life
     in her moving canvas-covered home. In the meantime Ferrier having
     recovered from his privations, distinguished himself as a useful
     guide and an indefatigable hunter. So rapidly did he gain the esteem
     of his new companions, that when they reached the end of their
     wanderings, it was unanimously agreed that he should be provided with
     as large and as fertile a tract of land as any of the settlers, with
     the exception of Young himself, and of Stangerson, Kemball, Johnston,
     and Drebber, who were the four principal Elders.

     On the farm thus acquired John Ferrier built himself a substantial
     log-house, which received so many additions in succeeding years that
     it grew into a roomy villa. He was a man of a practical turn of mind,
     keen in his dealings and skilful with his hands. His iron
     constitution enabled him to work morning and evening at improving and
     tilling his lands. Hence it came about that his farm and all that
     belonged to him prospered exceedingly. In three years he was better
     off than his neighbours, in six he was well-to-do, in nine he was
     rich, and in twelve there were not half a dozen men in the whole of
     Salt Lake City who could compare with him. From the great inland sea
     to the distant Wahsatch Mountains there was no name better known than
     that of John Ferrier.

     There was one way and only one in which he offended the
     susceptibilities of his co-religionists. No argument or persuasion
     could ever induce him to set up a female establishment after the
     manner of his companions. He never gave reasons for this persistent
     refusal, but contented himself by resolutely and inflexibly adhering
     to his determination. There were some who accused him of lukewarmness
     in his adopted religion, and others who put it down to greed of
     wealth and reluctance to incur expense. Others, again, spoke of some
     early love affair, and of a fair-haired girl who had pined away on
     the shores of the Atlantic. Whatever the reason, Ferrier remained
     strictly celibate. In every other respect he conformed to the
     religion of the young settlement, and gained the name of being an
     orthodox and straight-walking man.

     Lucy Ferrier grew up within the log-house, and assisted her adopted
     father in all his undertakings. The keen air of the mountains and the
     balsamic odour of the pine trees took the place of nurse and mother
     to the young girl. As year succeeded to year she grew taller and
     stronger, her cheek more rudy, and her step more elastic. Many a
     wayfarer upon the high road which ran by Ferrier's farm felt
     long-forgotten thoughts revive in their mind as they watched her
     lithe girlish figure tripping through the wheatfields, or met her
     mounted upon her father's mustang, and managing it with all the ease
     and grace of a true child of the West. So the bud blossomed into a
     flower, and the year which saw her father the richest of the farmers
     left her as fair a specimen of American girlhood as could be found in
     the whole Pacific slope.

     It was not the father, however, who first discovered that the child
     had developed into the woman. It seldom is in such cases. That
     mysterious change is too subtle and too gradual to be measured by
     dates. Least of all does the maiden herself know it until the tone of
     a voice or the touch of a hand sets her heart thrilling within her,
     and she learns, with a mixture of pride and of fear, that a new and a
     larger nature has awoken within her. There are few who cannot recall
     that day and remember the one little incident which heralded the dawn
     of a new life. In the case of Lucy Ferrier the occasion was serious
     enough in itself, apart from its future influence on her destiny and
     that of many besides.

     It was a warm June morning, and the Latter Day Saints were as busy as
     the bees whose hive they have chosen for their emblem. In the fields
     and in the streets rose the same hum of human industry. Down the
     dusty high roads defiled long streams of heavily-laden mules, all
     heading to the west, for the gold fever had broken out in California,
     and the Overland Route lay through the City of the Elect. There, too,
     were droves of sheep and bullocks coming in from the outlying pasture
     lands, and trains of tired immigrants, men and horses equally weary
     of their interminable journey. Through all this motley assemblage,
     threading her way with the skill of an accomplished rider, there
     galloped Lucy Ferrier, her fair face flushed with the exercise and
     her long chestnut hair floating out behind her. She had a commission
     from her father in the City, and was dashing in as she had done many
     a time before, with all the fearlessness of youth, thinking only of
     her task and how it was to be performed. The travel-stained
     adventurers gazed after her in astonishment, and even the unemotional
     Indians, journeying in with their pelties, relaxed their accustomed
     stoicism as they marvelled at the beauty of the pale-faced maiden.

     She had reached the outskirts of the city when she found the road
     blocked by a great drove of cattle, driven by a half-dozen
     wild-looking herdsmen from the plains. In her impatience she
     endeavoured to pass this obstacle by pushing her horse into what
     appeared to be a gap. Scarcely had she got fairly into it, however,
     before the beasts closed in behind her, and she found herself
     completely imbedded in the moving stream of fierce-eyed, long-horned
     bullocks. Accustomed as she was to deal with cattle, she was not
     alarmed at her situation, but took advantage of every opportunity to
     urge her horse on in the hopes of pushing her way through the
     cavalcade. Unfortunately the horns of one of the creatures, either by
     accident or design, came in violent contact with the flank of the
     mustang, and excited it to madness. In an instant it reared up upon
     its hind legs with a snort of rage, and pranced and tossed in a way
     that would have unseated any but a most skilful rider. The situation
     was full of peril. Every plunge of the excited horse brought it
     against the horns again, and goaded it to fresh madness. It was all
     that the girl could do to keep herself in the saddle, yet a slip
     would mean a terrible death under the hoofs of the unwieldy and
     terrified animals. Unaccustomed to sudden emergencies, her head began
     to swim, and her grip upon the bridle to relax. Choked by the rising
     cloud of dust and by the steam from the struggling creatures, she
     might have abandoned her efforts in despair, but for a kindly voice
     at her elbow which assured her of assistance. At the same moment a
     sinewy brown hand caught the frightened horse by the curb, and
     forcing a way through the drove, soon brought her to the outskirts.

     "You're not hurt, I hope, miss," said her preserver, respectfully.

     She looked up at his dark, fierce face, and laughed saucily. "I'm
     awful frightened," she said, naively; "whoever would have thought
     that Poncho would have been so scared by a lot of cows?"

     "Thank God you kept your seat," the other said earnestly. He was a
     tall, savage-looking young fellow, mounted on a powerful roan horse,
     and clad in the rough dress of a hunter, with a long rifle slung over
     his shoulders. "I guess you are the daughter of John Ferrier," he
     remarked, "I saw you ride down from his house. When you see him, ask
     him if he remembers the Jefferson Hopes of St. Louis. If he's the
     same Ferrier, my father and he were pretty thick."

     "Hadn't you better come and ask yourself?" she asked, demurely.

     The young fellow seemed pleased at the suggestion, and his dark eyes
     sparkled with pleasure. "I'll do so," he said, "we've been in the
     mountains for two months, and are not over and above in visiting
     condition. He must take us as he finds us."

     "He has a good deal to thank you for, and so have I," she answered,
     "he's awful fond of me. If those cows had jumped on me he'd have
     never got over it."

     "Neither would I," said her companion.

     "You! Well, I don't see that it would make much matter to you,
     anyhow. You ain't even a friend of ours."

     The young hunter's dark face grew so gloomy over this remark that
     Lucy Ferrier laughed aloud.

     "There, I didn't mean that," she said; "of course, you are a friend
     now. You must come and see us. Now I must push along, or father won't
     trust me with his business any more. Good-bye!"

     "Good-bye," he answered, raising his broad sombrero, and bending over
     her little hand. She wheeled her mustang round, gave it a cut with
     her riding-whip, and darted away down the broad road in a rolling
     cloud of dust.

     Young Jefferson Hope rode on with his companions, gloomy and
     taciturn. He and they had been among the Nevada Mountains prospecting
     for silver, and were returning to Salt Lake City in the hope of
     raising capital enough to work some lodes which they had discovered.
     He had been as keen as any of them upon the business until this
     sudden incident had drawn his thoughts into another channel. The
     sight of the fair young girl, as frank and wholesome as the Sierra
     breezes, had stirred his volcanic, untamed heart to its very depths.
     When she had vanished from his sight, he realized that a crisis had
     come in his life, and that neither silver speculations nor any other
     questions could ever be of such importance to him as this new and
     all-absorbing one. The love which had sprung up in his heart was not
     the sudden, changeable fancy of a boy, but rather the wild, fierce
     passion of a man of strong will and imperious temper. He had been
     accustomed to succeed in all that he undertook. He swore in his heart
     that he would not fail in this if human effort and human perseverance
     could render him successful.

     He called on John Ferrier that night, and many times again, until his
     face was a familiar one at the farm-house. John, cooped up in the
     valley, and absorbed in his work, had had little chance of learning
     the news of the outside world during the last twelve years. All this
     Jefferson Hope was able to tell him, and in a style which interested
     Lucy as well as her father. He had been a pioneer in California, and
     could narrate many a strange tale of fortunes made and fortunes lost
     in those wild, halcyon days. He had been a scout too, and a trapper,
     a silver explorer, and a ranchman. Wherever stirring adventures were
     to be had, Jefferson Hope had been there in search of them. He soon
     became a favourite with the old farmer, who spoke eloquently of his
     virtues. On such occasions, Lucy was silent, but her blushing cheek
     and her bright, happy eyes, showed only too clearly that her young
     heart was no longer her own. Her honest father may not have observed
     these symptoms, but they were assuredly not thrown away upon the man
     who had won her affections.

     It was a summer evening when he came galloping down the road and
     pulled up at the gate. She was at the doorway, and came down to meet
     him. He threw the bridle over the fence and strode up the pathway.

     "I am off, Lucy," he said, taking her two hands in his, and gazing
     tenderly down into her face; "I won't ask you to come with me now,
     but will you be ready to come when I am here again?"

     "And when will that be?" she asked, blushing and laughing.

     "A couple of months at the outside. I will come and claim you then,
     my darling. There's no one who can stand between us."

     "And how about father?" she asked.

     "He has given his consent, provided we get these mines working all
     right. I have no fear on that head."

     "Oh, well; of course, if you and father have arranged it all, there's
     no more to be said," she whispered, with her cheek against his broad
     breast.

     "Thank God!" he said, hoarsely, stooping and kissing her. "It is
     settled, then. The longer I stay, the harder it will be to go. They
     are waiting for me at the caon. Good-bye, my own darling--good-bye.
     In two months you shall see me."

     He tore himself from her as he spoke, and, flinging himself upon his
     horse, galloped furiously away, never even looking round, as though
     afraid that his resolution might fail him if he took one glance at
     what he was leaving. She stood at the gate, gazing after him until he
     vanished from her sight. Then she walked back into the house, the
     happiest girl in all Utah.





          CHAPTER III
          John Ferrier Talks With The Prophet


     Three weeks had passed since Jefferson Hope and his comrades had
     departed from Salt Lake City. John Ferrier's heart was sore within
     him when he thought of the young man's return, and of the impending
     loss of his adopted child. Yet her bright and happy face reconciled
     him to the arrangement more than any argument could have done. He had
     always determined, deep down in his resolute heart, that nothing
     would ever induce him to allow his daughter to wed a Mormon. Such a
     marriage he regarded as no marriage at all, but as a shame and a
     disgrace. Whatever he might think of the Mormon doctrines, upon that
     one point he was inflexible. He had to seal his mouth on the subject,
     however, for to express an unorthodox opinion was a dangerous matter
     in those days in the Land of the Saints.

     Yes, a dangerous matter--so dangerous that even the most saintly
     dared only whisper their religious opinions with bated breath, lest
     something which fell from their lips might be misconstrued, and bring
     down a swift retribution upon them. The victims of persecution had
     now turned persecutors on their own account, and persecutors of the
     most terrible description. Not the Inquisition of Seville, nor the
     German Vehmgericht, nor the Secret Societies of Italy, were ever able
     to put a more formidable machinery in motion than that which cast a
     cloud over the State of Utah.

     Its invisibility, and the mystery which was attached to it, made this
     organization doubly terrible. It appeared to be omniscient and
     omnipotent, and yet was neither seen nor heard. The man who held out
     against the Church vanished away, and none knew whither he had gone
     or what had befallen him. His wife and his children awaited him at
     home, but no father ever returned to tell them how he had fared at
     the hands of his secret judges. A rash word or a hasty act was
     followed by annihilation, and yet none knew what the nature might be
     of this terrible power which was suspended over them. No wonder that
     men went about in fear and trembling, and that even in the heart of
     the wilderness they dared not whisper the doubts which oppressed
     them.

     At first this vague and terrible power was exercised only upon the
     recalcitrants who, having embraced the Mormon faith, wished
     afterwards to pervert or to abandon it. Soon, however, it took a
     wider range. The supply of adult women was running short, and
     polygamy without a female population on which to draw was a barren
     doctrine indeed. Strange rumours began to be bandied about--rumours
     of murdered immigrants and rifled camps in regions where Indians had
     never been seen. Fresh women appeared in the harems of the
     Elders--women who pined and wept, and bore upon their faces the
     traces of an unextinguishable horror. Belated wanderers upon the
     mountains spoke of gangs of armed men, masked, stealthy, and
     noiseless, who flitted by them in the darkness. These tales and
     rumours took substance and shape, and were corroborated and
     re-corroborated, until they resolved themselves into a definite name.
     To this day, in the lonely ranches of the West, the name of the
     Danite Band, or the Avenging Angels, is a sinister and an ill-omened
     one.

     Fuller knowledge of the organization which produced such terrible
     results served to increase rather than to lessen the horror which it
     inspired in the minds of men. None knew who belonged to this ruthless
     society. The names of the participators in the deeds of blood and
     violence done under the name of religion were kept profoundly secret.
     The very friend to whom you communicated your misgivings as to the
     Prophet and his mission, might be one of those who would come forth
     at night with fire and sword to exact a terrible reparation. Hence
     every man feared his neighbour, and none spoke of the things which
     were nearest his heart.

     One fine morning, John Ferrier was about to set out to his
     wheatfields, when he heard the click of the latch, and, looking
     through the window, saw a stout, sandy-haired, middle-aged man coming
     up the pathway. His heart leapt to his mouth, for this was none other
     than the great Brigham Young himself. Full of trepidation--for he
     knew that such a visit boded him little good--Ferrier ran to the door
     to greet the Mormon chief. The latter, however, received his
     salutations coldly, and followed him with a stern face into the
     sitting-room.

     "Brother Ferrier," he said, taking a seat, and eyeing the farmer
     keenly from under his light-coloured eyelashes, "the true believers
     have been good friends to you. We picked you up when you were
     starving in the desert, we shared our food with you, led you safe to
     the Chosen Valley, gave you a goodly share of land, and allowed you
     to wax rich under our protection. Is not this so?"

     "It is so," answered John Ferrier.

     "In return for all this we asked but one condition: that was, that
     you should embrace the true faith, and conform in every way to its
     usages. This you promised to do, and this, if common report says
     truly, you have neglected."

     "And how have I neglected it?" asked Ferrier, throwing out his hands
     in expostulation. "Have I not given to the common fund? Have I not
     attended at the Temple? Have I not--?"

     "Where are your wives?" asked Young, looking round him. "Call them
     in, that I may greet them."

     "It is true that I have not married," Ferrier answered. "But women
     were few, and there were many who had better claims than I. I was not
     a lonely man: I had my daughter to attend to my wants."

     "It is of that daughter that I would speak to you," said the leader
     of the Mormons. "She has grown to be the flower of Utah, and has
     found favour in the eyes of many who are high in the land."

     John Ferrier groaned internally.

     "There are stories of her which I would fain disbelieve--stories that
     she is sealed to some Gentile. This must be the gossip of idle
     tongues. What is the thirteenth rule in the code of the sainted
     Joseph Smith? 'Let every maiden of the true faith marry one of the
     elect; for if she wed a Gentile, she commits a grievous sin.' This
     being so, it is impossible that you, who profess the holy creed,
     should suffer your daughter to violate it."

     John Ferrier made no answer, but he played nervously with his
     riding-whip.

     "Upon this one point your whole faith shall be tested--so it has been
     decided in the Sacred Council of Four. The girl is young, and we
     would not have her wed grey hairs, neither would we deprive her of
     all choice. We Elders have many heifers, *1 but our children must
     also be provided. Stangerson has a son, and Drebber has a son, and
     either of them would gladly welcome your daughter to their house. Let
     her choose between them. They are young and rich, and of the true
     faith. What say you to that?"

     Ferrier remained silent for some little time with his brows knitted.

     "You will give us time," he said at last. "My daughter is very
     young--she is scarce of an age to marry."

     "She shall have a month to choose," said Young, rising from his seat.
     "At the end of that time she shall give her answer."

     He was passing through the door, when he turned, with flushed face
     and flashing eyes. "It were better for you, John Ferrier," he
     thundered, "that you and she were now lying blanched skeletons upon
     the Sierra Blanco, than that you should put your weak wills against
     the orders of the Holy Four!"

     With a threatening gesture of his hand, he turned from the door, and
     Ferrier heard his heavy step scrunching along the shingly path.

     He was still sitting with his elbows upon his knees, considering how
     he should broach the matter to his daughter when a soft hand was laid
     upon his, and looking up, he saw her standing beside him. One glance
     at her pale, frightened face showed him that she had heard what had
     passed.

     "I could not help it," she said, in answer to his look. "His voice
     rang through the house. Oh, father, father, what shall we do?"

     "Don't you scare yourself," he answered, drawing her to him, and
     passing his broad, rough hand caressingly over her chestnut hair.
     "We'll fix it up somehow or another. You don't find your fancy kind
     o' lessening for this chap, do you?"

     A sob and a squeeze of his hand was her only answer.

     "No; of course not. I shouldn't care to hear you say you did. He's a
     likely lad, and he's a Christian, which is more than these folk here,
     in spite o' all their praying and preaching. There's a party starting
     for Nevada to-morrow, and I'll manage to send him a message letting
     him know the hole we are in. If I know anything o' that young man,
     he'll be back here with a speed that would whip electro-telegraphs."

     Lucy laughed through her tears at her father's description.

     "When he comes, he will advise us for the best. But it is for you
     that I am frightened, dear. One hears--one hears such dreadful
     stories about those who oppose the Prophet: something terrible always
     happens to them."

     "But we haven't opposed him yet," her father answered. "It will be
     time to look out for squalls when we do. We have a clear month before
     us; at the end of that, I guess we had best shin out of Utah."

     "Leave Utah!"

     "That's about the size of it."

     "But the farm?"

     "We will raise as much as we can in money, and let the rest go. To
     tell the truth, Lucy, it isn't the first time I have thought of doing
     it. I don't care about knuckling under to any man, as these folk do
     to their darned prophet. I'm a free-born American, and it's all new
     to me. Guess I'm too old to learn. If he comes browsing about this
     farm, he might chance to run up against a charge of buckshot
     travelling in the opposite direction."

     "But they won't let us leave," his daughter objected.

     "Wait till Jefferson comes, and we'll soon manage that. In the
     meantime, don't you fret yourself, my dearie, and don't get your eyes
     swelled up, else he'll be walking into me when he sees you. There's
     nothing to be afeared about, and there's no danger at all."

     John Ferrier uttered these consoling remarks in a very confident
     tone, but she could not help observing that he paid unusual care to
     the fastening of the doors that night, and that he carefully cleaned
     and loaded the rusty old shotgun which hung upon the wall of his
     bedroom.

     -----
     *1: Heber C Kemball, in one of his sermons, alludes to his hundred
     wives under this endearing epithet.
     




          CHAPTER IV
          A Flight For Life


     On the morning which followed his interview with the Mormon Prophet,
     John Ferrier went in to Salt Lake City, and having found his
     acquaintance, who was bound for the Nevada Mountains, he entrusted
     him with his message to Jefferson Hope. In it he told the young man
     of the imminent danger which threatened them, and how necessary it
     was that he should return. Having done thus he felt easier in his
     mind, and returned home with a lighter heart.

     As he approached his farm, he was surprised to see a horse hitched to
     each of the posts of the gate. Still more surprised was he on
     entering to find two young men in possession of his sitting-room.
     One, with a long pale face, was leaning back in the rocking-chair,
     with his feet cocked up upon the stove. The other, a bull-necked
     youth with coarse bloated features, was standing in front of the
     window with his hands in his pocket, whistling a popular hymn. Both
     of them nodded to Ferrier as he entered, and the one in the
     rocking-chair commenced the conversation.

     "Maybe you don't know us," he said. "This here is the son of Elder
     Drebber, and I'm Joseph Stangerson, who travelled with you in the
     desert when the Lord stretched out His hand and gathered you into the
     true fold."

     "As He will all the nations in His own good time," said the other in
     a nasal voice; "He grindeth slowly but exceeding small."

     John Ferrier bowed coldly. He had guessed who his visitors were.

     "We have come," continued Stangerson, "at the advice of our fathers
     to solicit the hand of your daughter for whichever of us may seem
     good to you and to her. As I have but four wives and Brother Drebber
     here has seven, it appears to me that my claim is the stronger one."

     "Nay, nay, Brother Stangerson," cried the other; "the question is not
     how many wives we have, but how many we can keep. My father has now
     given over his mills to me, and I am the richer man."

     "But my prospects are better," said the other, warmly. "When the Lord
     removes my father, I shall have his tanning yard and his leather
     factory. Then I am your elder, and am higher in the Church."

     "It will be for the maiden to decide," rejoined young Drebber,
     smirking at his own reflection in the glass. "We will leave it all to
     her decision."

     During this dialogue, John Ferrier had stood fuming in the doorway,
     hardly able to keep his riding-whip from the backs of his two
     visitors.

     "Look here," he said at last, striding up to them, "when my daughter
     summons you, you can come, but until then I don't want to see your
     faces again."

     The two young Mormons stared at him in amazement. In their eyes this
     competition between them for the maiden's hand was the highest of
     honours both to her and her father.

     "There are two ways out of the room," cried Ferrier; "there is the
     door, and there is the window. Which do you care to use?"

     His brown face looked so savage, and his gaunt hands so threatening,
     that his visitors sprang to their feet and beat a hurried retreat.
     The old farmer followed them to the door.

     "Let me know when you have settled which it is to be," he said,
     sardonically.

     "You shall smart for this!" Stangerson cried, white with rage. "You
     have defied the Prophet and the Council of Four. You shall rue it to
     the end of your days."

     "The hand of the Lord shall be heavy upon you," cried young Drebber;
     "He will arise and smite you!"

     "Then I'll start the smiting," exclaimed Ferrier furiously, and would
     have rushed upstairs for his gun had not Lucy seized him by the arm
     and restrained him. Before he could escape from her, the clatter of
     horses' hoofs told him that they were beyond his reach.

     "The young canting rascals!" he exclaimed, wiping the perspiration
     from his forehead; "I would sooner see you in your grave, my girl,
     than the wife of either of them."

     "And so should I, father," she answered, with spirit; "but Jefferson
     will soon be here."

     "Yes. It will not be long before he comes. The sooner the better, for
     we do not know what their next move may be."

     It was, indeed, high time that someone capable of giving advice and
     help should come to the aid of the sturdy old farmer and his adopted
     daughter. In the whole history of the settlement there had never been
     such a case of rank disobedience to the authority of the Elders. If
     minor errors were punished so sternly, what would be the fate of this
     arch rebel. Ferrier knew that his wealth and position would be of no
     avail to him. Others as well known and as rich as himself had been
     spirited away before now, and their goods given over to the Church.
     He was a brave man, but he trembled at the vague, shadowy terrors
     which hung over him. Any known danger he could face with a firm lip,
     but this suspense was unnerving. He concealed his fears from his
     daughter, however, and affected to make light of the whole matter,
     though she, with the keen eye of love, saw plainly that he was ill at
     ease.

     He expected that he would receive some message or remonstrance from
     Young as to his conduct, and he was not mistaken, though it came in
     an unlooked-for manner. Upon rising next morning he found, to his
     surprise, a small square of paper pinned on to the coverlet of his
     bed just over his chest. On it was printed, in bold straggling
     letters:--

     "Twenty-nine days are given you for amendment, and then--"

     The dash was more fear-inspiring than any threat could have been. How
     this warning came into his room puzzled John Ferrier sorely, for his
     servants slept in an outhouse, and the doors and windows had all been
     secured. He crumpled the paper up and said nothing to his daughter,
     but the incident struck a chill into his heart. The twenty-nine days
     were evidently the balance of the month which Young had promised.
     What strength or courage could avail against an enemy armed with such
     mysterious powers? The hand which fastened that pin might have struck
     him to the heart, and he could never have known who had slain him.

     Still more shaken was he next morning. They had sat down to their
     breakfast when Lucy with a cry of surprise pointed upwards. In the
     centre of the ceiling was scrawled, with a burned stick apparently,
     the number 28. To his daughter it was unintelligible, and he did not
     enlighten her. That night he sat up with his gun and kept watch and
     ward. He saw and he heard nothing, and yet in the morning a great 27
     had been painted upon the outside of his door.

     Thus day followed day; and as sure as morning came he found that his
     unseen enemies had kept their register, and had marked up in some
     conspicuous position how many days were still left to him out of the
     month of grace. Sometimes the fatal numbers appeared upon the walls,
     sometimes upon the floors, occasionally they were on small placards
     stuck upon the garden gate or the railings. With all his vigilance
     John Ferrier could not discover whence these daily warnings
     proceeded. A horror which was almost superstitious came upon him at
     the sight of them. He became haggard and restless, and his eyes had
     the troubled look of some hunted creature. He had but one hope in
     life now, and that was for the arrival of the young hunter from
     Nevada.

     Twenty had changed to fifteen and fifteen to ten, but there was no
     news of the absentee. One by one the numbers dwindled down, and still
     there came no sign of him. Whenever a horseman clattered down the
     road, or a driver shouted at his team, the old farmer hurried to the
     gate thinking that help had arrived at last. At last, when he saw
     five give way to four and that again to three, he lost heart, and
     abandoned all hope of escape. Single-handed, and with his limited
     knowledge of the mountains which surrounded the settlement, he knew
     that he was powerless. The more-frequented roads were strictly
     watched and guarded, and none could pass along them without an order
     from the Council. Turn which way he would, there appeared to be no
     avoiding the blow which hung over him. Yet the old man never wavered
     in his resolution to part with life itself before he consented to
     what he regarded as his daughter's dishonour.

     He was sitting alone one evening pondering deeply over his troubles,
     and searching vainly for some way out of them. That morning had shown
     the figure 2 upon the wall of his house, and the next day would be
     the last of the allotted time. What was to happen then? All manner of
     vague and terrible fancies filled his imagination. And his
     daughter--what was to become of her after he was gone? Was there no
     escape from the invisible network which was drawn all round them. He
     sank his head upon the table and sobbed at the thought of his own
     impotence.

     What was that? In the silence he heard a gentle scratching
     sound--low, but very distinct in the quiet of the night. It came from
     the door of the house. Ferrier crept into the hall and listened
     intently. There was a pause for a few moments, and then the low
     insidious sound was repeated. Someone was evidently tapping very
     gently upon one of the panels of the door. Was it some midnight
     assassin who had come to carry out the murderous orders of the secret
     tribunal? Or was it some agent who was marking up that the last day
     of grace had arrived. John Ferrier felt that instant death would be
     better than the suspense which shook his nerves and chilled his
     heart. Springing forward he drew the bolt and threw the door open.

     Outside all was calm and quiet. The night was fine, and the stars
     were twinkling brightly overhead. The little front garden lay before
     the farmer's eyes bounded by the fence and gate, but neither there
     nor on the road was any human being to be seen. With a sigh of
     relief, Ferrier looked to right and to left, until happening to
     glance straight down at his own feet he saw to his astonishment a man
     lying flat upon his face upon the ground, with arms and legs all
     asprawl.

     So unnerved was he at the sight that he leaned up against the wall
     with his hand to his throat to stifle his inclination to call out.
     His first thought was that the prostrate figure was that of some
     wounded or dying man, but as he watched it he saw it writhe along the
     ground and into the hall with the rapidity and noiselessness of a
     serpent. Once within the house the man sprang to his feet, closed the
     door, and revealed to the astonished farmer the fierce face and
     resolute expression of Jefferson Hope.

     "Good God!" gasped John Ferrier. "How you scared me! Whatever made
     you come in like that."

     "Give me food," the other said, hoarsely. "I have had no time for
     bite or sup for eight-and-forty hours." He flung himself upon the
     cold meat and bread which were still lying upon the table from his
     host's supper, and devoured it voraciously. "Does Lucy bear up well?"
     he asked, when he had satisfied his hunger.

     "Yes. She does not know the danger," her father answered.

     "That is well. The house is watched on every side. That is why I
     crawled my way up to it. They may be darned sharp, but they're not
     quite sharp enough to catch a Washoe hunter."

     John Ferrier felt a different man now that he realized that he had a
     devoted ally. He seized the young man's leathery hand and wrung it
     cordially. "You're a man to be proud of," he said. "There are not
     many who would come to share our danger and our troubles."

     "You've hit it there, pard," the young hunter answered. "I have a
     respect for you, but if you were alone in this business I'd think
     twice before I put my head into such a hornet's nest. It's Lucy that
     brings me here, and before harm comes on her I guess there will be
     one less o' the Hope family in Utah."

     "What are we to do?"

     "To-morrow is your last day, and unless you act to-night you are
     lost. I have a mule and two horses waiting in the Eagle Ravine. How
     much money have you?"

     "Two thousand dollars in gold, and five in notes."

     "That will do. I have as much more to add to it. We must push for
     Carson City through the mountains. You had best wake Lucy. It is as
     well that the servants do not sleep in the house."

     While Ferrier was absent, preparing his daughter for the approaching
     journey, Jefferson Hope packed all the eatables that he could find
     into a small parcel, and filled a stoneware jar with water, for he
     knew by experience that the mountain wells were few and far between.
     He had hardly completed his arrangements before the farmer returned
     with his daughter all dressed and ready for a start. The greeting
     between the lovers was warm, but brief, for minutes were precious,
     and there was much to be done.

     "We must make our start at once," said Jefferson Hope, speaking in a
     low but resolute voice, like one who realizes the greatness of the
     peril, but has steeled his heart to meet it. "The front and back
     entrances are watched, but with caution we may get away through the
     side window and across the fields. Once on the road we are only two
     miles from the Ravine where the horses are waiting. By daybreak we
     should be half-way through the mountains."

     "What if we are stopped," asked Ferrier.

     Hope slapped the revolver butt which protruded from the front of his
     tunic. "If they are too many for us we shall take two or three of
     them with us," he said with a sinister smile.

     The lights inside the house had all been extinguished, and from the
     darkened window Ferrier peered over the fields which had been his
     own, and which he was now about to abandon for ever. He had long
     nerved himself to the sacrifice, however, and the thought of the
     honour and happiness of his daughter outweighed any regret at his
     ruined fortunes. All looked so peaceful and happy, the rustling trees
     and the broad silent stretch of grain-land, that it was difficult to
     realize that the spirit of murder lurked through it all. Yet the
     white face and set expression of the young hunter showed that in his
     approach to the house he had seen enough to satisfy him upon that
     head.

     Ferrier carried the bag of gold and notes, Jefferson Hope had the
     scanty provisions and water, while Lucy had a small bundle containing
     a few of her more valued possessions. Opening the window very slowly
     and carefully, they waited until a dark cloud had somewhat obscured
     the night, and then one by one passed through into the little garden.
     With bated breath and crouching figures they stumbled across it, and
     gained the shelter of the hedge, which they skirted until they came
     to the gap which opened into the cornfields. They had just reached
     this point when the young man seized his two companions and dragged
     them down into the shadow, where they lay silent and trembling.

     It was as well that his prairie training had given Jefferson Hope the
     ears of a lynx. He and his friends had hardly crouched down before
     the melancholy hooting of a mountain owl was heard within a few yards
     of them, which was immediately answered by another hoot at a small
     distance. At the same moment a vague shadowy figure emerged from the
     gap for which they had been making, and uttered the plaintive signal
     cry again, on which a second man appeared out of the obscurity.

     "To-morrow at midnight," said the first who appeared to be in
     authority. "When the Whip-poor-Will calls three times."

     "It is well," returned the other. "Shall I tell Brother Drebber?"

     "Pass it on to him, and from him to the others. Nine to seven!"

     "Seven to five!" repeated the other, and the two figures flitted away
     in different directions. Their concluding words had evidently been
     some form of sign and countersign. The instant that their footsteps
     had died away in the distance, Jefferson Hope sprang to his feet, and
     helping his companions through the gap, led the way across the fields
     at the top of his speed, supporting and half-carrying the girl when
     her strength appeared to fail her.

     "Hurry on! hurry on!" he gasped from time to time. "We are through
     the line of sentinels. Everything depends on speed. Hurry on!"

     Once on the high road they made rapid progress. Only once did they
     meet anyone, and then they managed to slip into a field, and so avoid
     recognition. Before reaching the town the hunter branched away into a
     rugged and narrow footpath which led to the mountains. Two dark
     jagged peaks loomed above them through the darkness, and the defile
     which led between them was the Eagle Caon in which the horses were
     awaiting them. With unerring instinct Jefferson Hope picked his way
     among the great boulders and along the bed of a dried-up watercourse,
     until he came to the retired corner, screened with rocks, where the
     faithful animals had been picketed. The girl was placed upon the
     mule, and old Ferrier upon one of the horses, with his money-bag,
     while Jefferson Hope led the other along the precipitous and
     dangerous path.

     It was a bewildering route for anyone who was not accustomed to face
     Nature in her wildest moods. On the one side a great crag towered up
     a thousand feet or more, black, stern, and menacing, with long
     basaltic columns upon its rugged surface like the ribs of some
     petrified monster. On the other hand a wild chaos of boulders and
     debris made all advance impossible. Between the two ran the irregular
     track, so narrow in places that they had to travel in Indian file,
     and so rough that only practised riders could have traversed it at
     all. Yet in spite of all dangers and difficulties, the hearts of the
     fugitives were light within them, for every step increased the
     distance between them and the terrible despotism from which they were
     flying.

     They soon had a proof, however, that they were still within the
     jurisdiction of the Saints. They had reached the very wildest and
     most desolate portion of the pass when the girl gave a startled cry,
     and pointed upwards. On a rock which overlooked the track, showing
     out dark and plain against the sky, there stood a solitary sentinel.
     He saw them as soon as they perceived him, and his military challenge
     of "Who goes there?" rang through the silent ravine.

     "Travellers for Nevada," said Jefferson Hope, with his hand upon the
     rifle which hung by his saddle.

     They could see the lonely watcher fingering his gun, and peering down
     at them as if dissatisfied at their reply.

     "By whose permission?" he asked.

     "The Holy Four," answered Ferrier. His Mormon experiences had taught
     him that that was the highest authority to which he could refer.

     "Nine from seven," cried the sentinel.

     "Seven from five," returned Jefferson Hope promptly, remembering the
     countersign which he had heard in the garden.

     "Pass, and the Lord go with you," said the voice from above. Beyond
     his post the path broadened out, and the horses were able to break
     into a trot. Looking back, they could see the solitary watcher
     leaning upon his gun, and knew that they had passed the outlying post
     of the chosen people, and that freedom lay before them.





          CHAPTER V
          The Avenging Angels


     All night their course lay through intricate defiles and over
     irregular and rock-strewn paths. More than once they lost their way,
     but Hope's intimate knowledge of the mountains enabled them to regain
     the track once more. When morning broke, a scene of marvellous though
     savage beauty lay before them. In every direction the great
     snow-capped peaks hemmed them in, peeping over each other's shoulders
     to the far horizon. So steep were the rocky banks on either side of
     them, that the larch and the pine seemed to be suspended over their
     heads, and to need only a gust of wind to come hurtling down upon
     them. Nor was the fear entirely an illusion, for the barren valley
     was thickly strewn with trees and boulders which had fallen in a
     similar manner. Even as they passed, a great rock came thundering
     down with a hoarse rattle which woke the echoes in the silent gorges,
     and startled the weary horses into a gallop.

     As the sun rose slowly above the eastern horizon, the caps of the
     great mountains lit up one after the other, like lamps at a festival,
     until they were all ruddy and glowing. The magnificent spectacle
     cheered the hearts of the three fugitives and gave them fresh energy.
     At a wild torrent which swept out of a ravine they called a halt and
     watered their horses, while they partook of a hasty breakfast. Lucy
     and her father would fain have rested longer, but Jefferson Hope was
     inexorable. "They will be upon our track by this time," he said.
     "Everything depends upon our speed. Once safe in Carson we may rest
     for the remainder of our lives."

     During the whole of that day they struggled on through the defiles,
     and by evening they calculated that they were more than thirty miles
     from their enemies. At night-time they chose the base of a beetling
     crag, where the rocks offered some protection from the chill wind,
     and there huddled together for warmth, they enjoyed a few hours'
     sleep. Before daybreak, however, they were up and on their way once
     more. They had seen no signs of any pursuers, and Jefferson Hope
     began to think that they were fairly out of the reach of the terrible
     organization whose enmity they had incurred. He little knew how far
     that iron grasp could reach, or how soon it was to close upon them
     and crush them.

     About the middle of the second day of their flight their scanty store
     of provisions began to run out. This gave the hunter little
     uneasiness, however, for there was game to be had among the
     mountains, and he had frequently before had to depend upon his rifle
     for the needs of life. Choosing a sheltered nook, he piled together a
     few dried branches and made a blazing fire, at which his companions
     might warm themselves, for they were now nearly five thousand feet
     above the sea level, and the air was bitter and keen. Having tethered
     the horses, and bade Lucy adieu, he threw his gun over his shoulder,
     and set out in search of whatever chance might throw in his way.
     Looking back he saw the old man and the young girl crouching over the
     blazing fire, while the three animals stood motionless in the
     back-ground. Then the intervening rocks hid them from his view.

     He walked for a couple of miles through one ravine after another
     without success, though from the marks upon the bark of the trees,
     and other indications, he judged that there were numerous bears in
     the vicinity. At last, after two or three hours' fruitless search, he
     was thinking of turning back in despair, when casting his eyes
     upwards he saw a sight which sent a thrill of pleasure through his
     heart. On the edge of a jutting pinnacle, three or four hundred feet
     above him, there stood a creature somewhat resembling a sheep in
     appearance, but armed with a pair of gigantic horns. The
     big-horn--for so it is called--was acting, probably, as a guardian
     over a flock which were invisible to the hunter; but fortunately it
     was heading in the opposite direction, and had not perceived him.
     Lying on his face, he rested his rifle upon a rock, and took a long
     and steady aim before drawing the trigger. The animal sprang into the
     air, tottered for a moment upon the edge of the precipice, and then
     came crashing down into the valley beneath.

     The creature was too unwieldy to lift, so the hunter contented
     himself with cutting away one haunch and part of the flank. With this
     trophy over his shoulder, he hastened to retrace his steps, for the
     evening was already drawing in. He had hardly started, however,
     before he realized the difficulty which faced him. In his eagerness
     he had wandered far past the ravines which were known to him, and it
     was no easy matter to pick out the path which he had taken. The
     valley in which he found himself divided and sub-divided into many
     gorges, which were so like each other that it was impossible to
     distinguish one from the other. He followed one for a mile or more
     until he came to a mountain torrent which he was sure that he had
     never seen before. Convinced that he had taken the wrong turn, he
     tried another, but with the same result. Night was coming on rapidly,
     and it was almost dark before he at last found himself in a defile
     which was familiar to him. Even then it was no easy matter to keep to
     the right track, for the moon had not yet risen, and the high cliffs
     on either side made the obscurity more profound. Weighed down with
     his burden, and weary from his exertions, he stumbled along, keeping
     up his heart by the reflection that every step brought him nearer to
     Lucy, and that he carried with him enough to ensure them food for the
     remainder of their journey.

     He had now come to the mouth of the very defile in which he had left
     them. Even in the darkness he could recognize the outline of the
     cliffs which bounded it. They must, he reflected, be awaiting him
     anxiously, for he had been absent nearly five hours. In the gladness
     of his heart he put his hands to his mouth and made the glen re-echo
     to a loud halloo as a signal that he was coming. He paused and
     listened for an answer. None came save his own cry, which clattered
     up the dreary silent ravines, and was borne back to his ears in
     countless repetitions. Again he shouted, even louder than before, and
     again no whisper came back from the friends whom he had left such a
     short time ago. A vague, nameless dread came over him, and he hurried
     onwards frantically, dropping the precious food in his agitation.

     When he turned the corner, he came full in sight of the spot where
     the fire had been lit. There was still a glowing pile of wood ashes
     there, but it had evidently not been tended since his departure. The
     same dead silence still reigned all round. With his fears all changed
     to convictions, he hurried on. There was no living creature near the
     remains of the fire: animals, man, maiden, all were gone. It was only
     too clear that some sudden and terrible disaster had occurred during
     his absence--a disaster which had embraced them all, and yet had left
     no traces behind it.

     Bewildered and stunned by this blow, Jefferson Hope felt his head
     spin round, and had to lean upon his rifle to save himself from
     falling. He was essentially a man of action, however, and speedily
     recovered from his temporary impotence. Seizing a half-consumed piece
     of wood from the smouldering fire, he blew it into a flame, and
     proceeded with its help to examine the little camp. The ground was
     all stamped down by the feet of horses, showing that a large party of
     mounted men had overtaken the fugitives, and the direction of their
     tracks proved that they had afterwards turned back to Salt Lake City.
     Had they carried back both of his companions with them? Jefferson
     Hope had almost persuaded himself that they must have done so, when
     his eye fell upon an object which made every nerve of his body tingle
     within him. A little way on one side of the camp was a low-lying heap
     of reddish soil, which had assuredly not been there before. There was
     no mistaking it for anything but a newly-dug grave. As the young
     hunter approached it, he perceived that a stick had been planted on
     it, with a sheet of paper stuck in the cleft fork of it. The
     inscription upon the paper was brief, but to the point:

                                  JOHN FERRIER,
                           Formerly of Salt Lake City,
                             Died August 4th, 1860.
                                        

     The sturdy old man, whom he had left so short a time before, was
     gone, then, and this was all his epitaph. Jefferson Hope looked
     wildly round to see if there was a second grave, but there was no
     sign of one. Lucy had been carried back by their terrible pursuers to
     fulfil her original destiny, by becoming one of the harem of the
     Elder's son. As the young fellow realized the certainty of her fate,
     and his own powerlessness to prevent it, he wished that he, too, was
     lying with the old farmer in his last silent resting-place.

     Again, however, his active spirit shook off the lethargy which
     springs from despair. If there was nothing else left to him, he could
     at least devote his life to revenge. With indomitable patience and
     perseverance, Jefferson Hope possessed also a power of sustained
     vindictiveness, which he may have learned from the Indians amongst
     whom he had lived. As he stood by the desolate fire, he felt that the
     only one thing which could assuage his grief would be thorough and
     complete retribution, brought by his own hand upon his enemies. His
     strong will and untiring energy should, he determined, be devoted to
     that one end. With a grim, white face, he retraced his steps to where
     he had dropped the food, and having stirred up the smouldering fire,
     he cooked enough to last him for a few days. This he made up into a
     bundle, and, tired as he was, he set himself to walk back through the
     mountains upon the track of the avenging angels.

     For five days he toiled footsore and weary through the defiles which
     he had already traversed on horseback. At night he flung himself down
     among the rocks, and snatched a few hours of sleep; but before
     daybreak he was always well on his way. On the sixth day, he reached
     the Eagle Caon, from which they had commenced their ill-fated
     flight. Thence he could look down upon the home of the saints. Worn
     and exhausted, he leaned upon his rifle and shook his gaunt hand
     fiercely at the silent widespread city beneath him. As he looked at
     it, he observed that there were flags in some of the principal
     streets, and other signs of festivity. He was still speculating as to
     what this might mean when he heard the clatter of horse's hoofs, and
     saw a mounted man riding towards him. As he approached, he recognized
     him as a Mormon named Cowper, to whom he had rendered services at
     different times. He therefore accosted him when he got up to him,
     with the object of finding out what Lucy Ferrier's fate had been.

     "I am Jefferson Hope," he said. "You remember me."

     The Mormon looked at him with undisguised astonishment--indeed, it
     was difficult to recognize in this tattered, unkempt wanderer, with
     ghastly white face and fierce, wild eyes, the spruce young hunter of
     former days. Having, however, at last, satisfied himself as to his
     identity, the man's surprise changed to consternation.

     "You are mad to come here," he cried. "It is as much as my own life
     is worth to be seen talking with you. There is a warrant against you
     from the Holy Four for assisting the Ferriers away."

     "I don't fear them, or their warrant," Hope said, earnestly. "You
     must know something of this matter, Cowper. I conjure you by
     everything you hold dear to answer a few questions. We have always
     been friends. For God's sake, don't refuse to answer me."

     "What is it?" the Mormon asked uneasily. "Be quick. The very rocks
     have ears and the trees eyes."

     "What has become of Lucy Ferrier?"

     "She was married yesterday to young Drebber. Hold up, man, hold up,
     you have no life left in you."

     "Don't mind me," said Hope faintly. He was white to the very lips,
     and had sunk down on the stone against which he had been leaning.
     "Married, you say?"

     "Married yesterday--that's what those flags are for on the Endowment
     House. There was some words between young Drebber and young
     Stangerson as to which was to have her. They'd both been in the party
     that followed them, and Stangerson had shot her father, which seemed
     to give him the best claim; but when they argued it out in council,
     Drebber's party was the stronger, so the Prophet gave her over to
     him. No one won't have her very long though, for I saw death in her
     face yesterday. She is more like a ghost than a woman. Are you off,
     then?"

     "Yes, I am off," said Jefferson Hope, who had risen from his seat.
     His face might have been chiselled out of marble, so hard and set was
     its expression, while its eyes glowed with a baleful light.

     "Where are you going?"

     "Never mind," he answered; and, slinging his weapon over his
     shoulder, strode off down the gorge and so away into the heart of the
     mountains to the haunts of the wild beasts. Amongst them all there
     was none so fierce and so dangerous as himself.

     The prediction of the Mormon was only too well fulfilled. Whether it
     was the terrible death of her father or the effects of the hateful
     marriage into which she had been forced, poor Lucy never held up her
     head again, but pined away and died within a month. Her sottish
     husband, who had married her principally for the sake of John
     Ferrier's property, did not affect any great grief at his
     bereavement; but his other wives mourned over her, and sat up with
     her the night before the burial, as is the Mormon custom. They were
     grouped round the bier in the early hours of the morning, when, to
     their inexpressible fear and astonishment, the door was flung open,
     and a savage-looking, weather-beaten man in tattered garments strode
     into the room. Without a glance or a word to the cowering women, he
     walked up to the white silent figure which had once contained the
     pure soul of Lucy Ferrier. Stooping over her, he pressed his lips
     reverently to her cold forehead, and then, snatching up her hand, he
     took the wedding-ring from her finger. "She shall not be buried in
     that," he cried with a fierce snarl, and before an alarm could be
     raised sprang down the stairs and was gone. So strange and so brief
     was the episode, that the watchers might have found it hard to
     believe it themselves or persuade other people of it, had it not been
     for the undeniable fact that the circlet of gold which marked her as
     having been a bride had disappeared.

     For some months Jefferson Hope lingered among the mountains, leading
     a strange wild life, and nursing in his heart the fierce desire for
     vengeance which possessed him. Tales were told in the City of the
     weird figure which was seen prowling about the suburbs, and which
     haunted the lonely mountain gorges. Once a bullet whistled through
     Stangerson's window and flattened itself upon the wall within a foot
     of him. On another occasion, as Drebber passed under a cliff a great
     boulder crashed down on him, and he only escaped a terrible death by
     throwing himself upon his face. The two young Mormons were not long
     in discovering the reason of these attempts upon their lives, and led
     repeated expeditions into the mountains in the hope of capturing or
     killing their enemy, but always without success. Then they adopted
     the precaution of never going out alone or after nightfall, and of
     having their houses guarded. After a time they were able to relax
     these measures, for nothing was either heard or seen of their
     opponent, and they hoped that time had cooled his vindictiveness.

     Far from doing so, it had, if anything, augmented it. The hunter's
     mind was of a hard, unyielding nature, and the predominant idea of
     revenge had taken such complete possession of it that there was no
     room for any other emotion. He was, however, above all things
     practical. He soon realized that even his iron constitution could not
     stand the incessant strain which he was putting upon it. Exposure and
     want of wholesome food were wearing him out. If he died like a dog
     among the mountains, what was to become of his revenge then? And yet
     such a death was sure to overtake him if he persisted. He felt that
     that was to play his enemy's game, so he reluctantly returned to the
     old Nevada mines, there to recruit his health and to amass money
     enough to allow him to pursue his object without privation.

     His intention had been to be absent a year at the most, but a
     combination of unforeseen circumstances prevented his leaving the
     mines for nearly five. At the end of that time, however, his memory
     of his wrongs and his craving for revenge were quite as keen as on
     that memorable night when he had stood by John Ferrier's grave.
     Disguised, and under an assumed name, he returned to Salt Lake City,
     careless what became of his own life, as long as he obtained what he
     knew to be justice. There he found evil tidings awaiting him. There
     had been a schism among the Chosen People a few months before, some
     of the younger members of the Church having rebelled against the
     authority of the Elders, and the result had been the secession of a
     certain number of the malcontents, who had left Utah and become
     Gentiles. Among these had been Drebber and Stangerson; and no one
     knew whither they had gone. Rumour reported that Drebber had managed
     to convert a large part of his property into money, and that he had
     departed a wealthy man, while his companion, Stangerson, was
     comparatively poor. There was no clue at all, however, as to their
     whereabouts.

     Many a man, however vindictive, would have abandoned all thought of
     revenge in the face of such a difficulty, but Jefferson Hope never
     faltered for a moment. With the small competence he possessed, eked
     out by such employment as he could pick up, he travelled from town to
     town through the United States in quest of his enemies. Year passed
     into year, his black hair turned grizzled, but still he wandered on,
     a human bloodhound, with his mind wholly set upon the one object upon
     which he had devoted his life. At last his perseverance was rewarded.
     It was but a glance of a face in a window, but that one glance told
     him that Cleveland in Ohio possessed the men whom he was in pursuit
     of. He returned to his miserable lodgings with his plan of vengeance
     all arranged. It chanced, however, that Drebber, looking from his
     window, had recognized the vagrant in the street, and had read murder
     in his eyes. He hurried before a justice of the peace, accompanied by
     Stangerson, who had become his private secretary, and represented to
     him that they were in danger of their lives from the jealousy and
     hatred of an old rival. That evening Jefferson Hope was taken into
     custody, and not being able to find sureties, was detained for some
     weeks. When at last he was liberated, it was only to find that
     Drebber's house was deserted, and that he and his secretary had
     departed for Europe.

     Again the avenger had been foiled, and again his concentrated hatred
     urged him to continue the pursuit. Funds were wanting, however, and
     for some time he had to return to work, saving every dollar for his
     approaching journey. At last, having collected enough to keep life in
     him, he departed for Europe, and tracked his enemies from city to
     city, working his way in any menial capacity, but never overtaking
     the fugitives. When he reached St. Petersburg they had departed for
     Paris; and when he followed them there he learned that they had just
     set off for Copenhagen. At the Danish capital he was again a few days
     late, for they had journeyed on to London, where he at last succeeded
     in running them to earth. As to what occurred there, we cannot do
     better than quote the old hunter's own account, as duly recorded in
     Dr. Watson's Journal, to which we are already under such obligations.





          CHAPTER VI
          A Continuation Of The Reminiscences Of John Watson, M.D.


     Our prisoner's furious resistance did not apparently indicate any
     ferocity in his disposition towards ourselves, for on finding himself
     powerless, he smiled in an affable manner, and expressed his hopes
     that he had not hurt any of us in the scuffle. "I guess you're going
     to take me to the police-station," he remarked to Sherlock Holmes.
     "My cab's at the door. If you'll loose my legs I'll walk down to it.
     I'm not so light to lift as I used to be."

     Gregson and Lestrade exchanged glances as if they thought this
     proposition rather a bold one; but Holmes at once took the prisoner
     at his word, and loosened the towel which we had bound round his
     ankles. He rose and stretched his legs, as though to assure himself
     that they were free once more. I remember that I thought to myself,
     as I eyed him, that I had seldom seen a more powerfully built man;
     and his dark sunburned face bore an expression of determination and
     energy which was as formidable as his personal strength.

     "If there's a vacant place for a chief of the police, I reckon you
     are the man for it," he said, gazing with undisguised admiration at
     my fellow-lodger. "The way you kept on my trail was a caution."

     "You had better come with me," said Holmes to the two detectives.

     "I can drive you," said Lestrade.

     "Good! and Gregson can come inside with me. You too, Doctor, you have
     taken an interest in the case and may as well stick to us."

     I assented gladly, and we all descended together. Our prisoner made
     no attempt at escape, but stepped calmly into the cab which had been
     his, and we followed him. Lestrade mounted the box, whipped up the
     horse, and brought us in a very short time to our destination. We
     were ushered into a small chamber where a police Inspector noted down
     our prisoner's name and the names of the men with whose murder he had
     been charged. The official was a white-faced unemotional man, who
     went through his duties in a dull mechanical way. "The prisoner will
     be put before the magistrates in the course of the week," he said;
     "in the mean time, Mr. Jefferson Hope, have you anything that you
     wish to say? I must warn you that your words will be taken down, and
     may be used against you."

     "I've got a good deal to say," our prisoner said slowly. "I want to
     tell you gentlemen all about it."

     "Hadn't you better reserve that for your trial?" asked the Inspector.

     "I may never be tried," he answered. "You needn't look startled. It
     isn't suicide I am thinking of. Are you a Doctor?" He turned his
     fierce dark eyes upon me as he asked this last question.

     "Yes; I am," I answered.

     "Then put your hand here," he said, with a smile, motioning with his
     manacled wrists towards his chest.

     I did so; and became at once conscious of an extraordinary throbbing
     and commotion which was going on inside. The walls of his chest
     seemed to thrill and quiver as a frail building would do inside when
     some powerful engine was at work. In the silence of the room I could
     hear a dull humming and buzzing noise which proceeded from the same
     source.

     "Why," I cried, "you have an aortic aneurism!"

     "That's what they call it," he said, placidly. "I went to a Doctor
     last week about it, and he told me that it is bound to burst before
     many days passed. It has been getting worse for years. I got it from
     over-exposure and under-feeding among the Salt Lake Mountains. I've
     done my work now, and I don't care how soon I go, but I should like
     to leave some account of the business behind me. I don't want to be
     remembered as a common cut-throat."

     The Inspector and the two detectives had a hurried discussion as to
     the advisability of allowing him to tell his story.

     "Do you consider, Doctor, that there is immediate danger?" the former
     asked.

     "Most certainly there is," I answered.

     "In that case it is clearly our duty, in the interests of justice, to
     take his statement," said the Inspector. "You are at liberty, sir, to
     give your account, which I again warn you will be taken down."

     "I'll sit down, with your leave," the prisoner said, suiting the
     action to the word. "This aneurism of mine makes me easily tired, and
     the tussle we had half an hour ago has not mended matters. I'm on the
     brink of the grave, and I am not likely to lie to you. Every word I
     say is the absolute truth, and how you use it is a matter of no
     consequence to me."

     With these words, Jefferson Hope leaned back in his chair and began
     the following remarkable statement. He spoke in a calm and methodical
     manner, as though the events which he narrated were commonplace
     enough. I can vouch for the accuracy of the subjoined account, for I
     have had access to Lestrade's note-book, in which the prisoner's
     words were taken down exactly as they were uttered.

     "It don't much matter to you why I hated these men," he said; "it's
     enough that they were guilty of the death of two human beings--a
     father and a daughter--and that they had, therefore, forfeited their
     own lives. After the lapse of time that has passed since their crime,
     it was impossible for me to secure a conviction against them in any
     court. I knew of their guilt though, and I determined that I should
     be judge, jury, and executioner all rolled into one. You'd have done
     the same, if you have any manhood in you, if you had been in my
     place.

     "That girl that I spoke of was to have married me twenty years ago.
     She was forced into marrying that same Drebber, and broke her heart
     over it. I took the marriage ring from her dead finger, and I vowed
     that his dying eyes should rest upon that very ring, and that his
     last thoughts should be of the crime for which he was punished. I
     have carried it about with me, and have followed him and his
     accomplice over two continents until I caught them. They thought to
     tire me out, but they could not do it. If I die to-morrow, as is
     likely enough, I die knowing that my work in this world is done, and
     well done. They have perished, and by my hand. There is nothing left
     for me to hope for, or to desire.

     "They were rich and I was poor, so that it was no easy matter for me
     to follow them. When I got to London my pocket was about empty, and I
     found that I must turn my hand to something for my living. Driving
     and riding are as natural to me as walking, so I applied at a
     cabowner's office, and soon got employment. I was to bring a certain
     sum a week to the owner, and whatever was over that I might keep for
     myself. There was seldom much over, but I managed to scrape along
     somehow. The hardest job was to learn my way about, for I reckon that
     of all the mazes that ever were contrived, this city is the most
     confusing. I had a map beside me though, and when once I had spotted
     the principal hotels and stations, I got on pretty well.

     "It was some time before I found out where my two gentlemen were
     living; but I inquired and inquired until at last I dropped across
     them. They were at a boarding-house at Camberwell, over on the other
     side of the river. When once I found them out I knew that I had them
     at my mercy. I had grown my beard, and there was no chance of their
     recognizing me. I would dog them and follow them until I saw my
     opportunity. I was determined that they should not escape me again.

     "They were very near doing it for all that. Go where they would about
     London, I was always at their heels. Sometimes I followed them on my
     cab, and sometimes on foot, but the former was the best, for then
     they could not get away from me. It was only early in the morning or
     late at night that I could earn anything, so that I began to get
     behind hand with my employer. I did not mind that, however, as long
     as I could lay my hand upon the men I wanted.

     "They were very cunning, though. They must have thought that there
     was some chance of their being followed, for they would never go out
     alone, and never after nightfall. During two weeks I drove behind
     them every day, and never once saw them separate. Drebber himself was
     drunk half the time, but Stangerson was not to be caught napping. I
     watched them late and early, but never saw the ghost of a chance; but
     I was not discouraged, for something told me that the hour had almost
     come. My only fear was that this thing in my chest might burst a
     little too soon and leave my work undone.

     "At last, one evening I was driving up and down Torquay Terrace, as
     the street was called in which they boarded, when I saw a cab drive
     up to their door. Presently some luggage was brought out, and after a
     time Drebber and Stangerson followed it, and drove off. I whipped up
     my horse and kept within sight of them, feeling very ill at ease, for
     I feared that they were going to shift their quarters. At Euston
     Station they got out, and I left a boy to hold my horse, and followed
     them on to the platform. I heard them ask for the Liverpool train,
     and the guard answer that one had just gone and there would not be
     another for some hours. Stangerson seemed to be put out at that, but
     Drebber was rather pleased than otherwise. I got so close to them in
     the bustle that I could hear every word that passed between them.
     Drebber said that he had a little business of his own to do, and that
     if the other would wait for him he would soon rejoin him. His
     companion remonstrated with him, and reminded him that they had
     resolved to stick together. Drebber answered that the matter was a
     delicate one, and that he must go alone. I could not catch what
     Stangerson said to that, but the other burst out swearing, and
     reminded him that he was nothing more than his paid servant, and that
     he must not presume to dictate to him. On that the Secretary gave it
     up as a bad job, and simply bargained with him that if he missed the
     last train he should rejoin him at Halliday's Private Hotel; to which
     Drebber answered that he would be back on the platform before eleven,
     and made his way out of the station.

     "The moment for which I had waited so long had at last come. I had my
     enemies within my power. Together they could protect each other, but
     singly they were at my mercy. I did not act, however, with undue
     precipitation. My plans were already formed. There is no satisfaction
     in vengeance unless the offender has time to realize who it is that
     strikes him, and why retribution has come upon him. I had my plans
     arranged by which I should have the opportunity of making the man who
     had wronged me understand that his old sin had found him out. It
     chanced that some days before a gentleman who had been engaged in
     looking over some houses in the Brixton Road had dropped the key of
     one of them in my carriage. It was claimed that same evening, and
     returned; but in the interval I had taken a moulding of it, and had a
     duplicate constructed. By means of this I had access to at least one
     spot in this great city where I could rely upon being free from
     interruption. How to get Drebber to that house was the difficult
     problem which I had now to solve.

     "He walked down the road and went into one or two liquor shops,
     staying for nearly half-an-hour in the last of them. When he came out
     he staggered in his walk, and was evidently pretty well on. There was
     a hansom just in front of me, and he hailed it. I followed it so
     close that the nose of my horse was within a yard of his driver the
     whole way. We rattled across Waterloo Bridge and through miles of
     streets, until, to my astonishment, we found ourselves back in the
     Terrace in which he had boarded. I could not imagine what his
     intention was in returning there; but I went on and pulled up my cab
     a hundred yards or so from the house. He entered it, and his hansom
     drove away. Give me a glass of water, if you please. My mouth gets
     dry with the talking."

     I handed him the glass, and he drank it down.

     "That's better," he said. "Well, I waited for a quarter of an hour,
     or more, when suddenly there came a noise like people struggling
     inside the house. Next moment the door was flung open and two men
     appeared, one of whom was Drebber, and the other was a young chap
     whom I had never seen before. This fellow had Drebber by the collar,
     and when they came to the head of the steps he gave him a shove and a
     kick which sent him half across the road. 'You hound,' he cried,
     shaking his stick at him; 'I'll teach you to insult an honest girl!'
     He was so hot that I think he would have thrashed Drebber with his
     cudgel, only that the cur staggered away down the road as fast as his
     legs would carry him. He ran as far as the corner, and then, seeing
     my cab, he hailed me and jumped in. 'Drive me to Halliday's Private
     Hotel,' said he.

     "When I had him fairly inside my cab, my heart jumped so with joy
     that I feared lest at this last moment my aneurism might go wrong. I
     drove along slowly, weighing in my own mind what it was best to do. I
     might take him right out into the country, and there in some deserted
     lane have my last interview with him. I had almost decided upon this,
     when he solved the problem for me. The craze for drink had seized him
     again, and he ordered me to pull up outside a gin palace. He went in,
     leaving word that I should wait for him. There he remained until
     closing time, and when he came out he was so far gone that I knew the
     game was in my own hands.

     "Don't imagine that I intended to kill him in cold blood. It would
     only have been rigid justice if I had done so, but I could not bring
     myself to do it. I had long determined that he should have a show for
     his life if he chose to take advantage of it. Among the many billets
     which I have filled in America during my wandering life, I was once
     janitor and sweeper out of the laboratory at York College. One day
     the professor was lecturing on poisons, and he showed his students
     some alkaloid, as he called it, which he had extracted from some
     South American arrow poison, and which was so powerful that the least
     grain meant instant death. I spotted the bottle in which this
     preparation was kept, and when they were all gone, I helped myself to
     a little of it. I was a fairly good dispenser, so I worked this
     alkaloid into small, soluble pills, and each pill I put in a box with
     a similar pill made without the poison. I determined at the time that
     when I had my chance, my gentlemen should each have a draw out of one
     of these boxes, while I ate the pill that remained. It would be quite
     as deadly, and a good deal less noisy than firing across a
     handkerchief. From that day I had always my pill boxes about with me,
     and the time had now come when I was to use them.

     "It was nearer one than twelve, and a wild, bleak night, blowing hard
     and raining in torrents. Dismal as it was outside, I was glad
     within--so glad that I could have shouted out from pure exultation.
     If any of you gentlemen have ever pined for a thing, and longed for
     it during twenty long years, and then suddenly found it within your
     reach, you would understand my feelings. I lit a cigar, and puffed at
     it to steady my nerves, but my hands were trembling, and my temples
     throbbing with excitement. As I drove, I could see old John Ferrier
     and sweet Lucy looking at me out of the darkness and smiling at me,
     just as plain as I see you all in this room. All the way they were
     ahead of me, one on each side of the horse until I pulled up at the
     house in the Brixton Road.

     "There was not a soul to be seen, nor a sound to be heard, except the
     dripping of the rain. When I looked in at the window, I found Drebber
     all huddled together in a drunken sleep. I shook him by the arm,
     'It's time to get out,' I said.

     "'All right, cabby,' said he.

     "I suppose he thought we had come to the hotel that he had mentioned,
     for he got out without another word, and followed me down the garden.
     I had to walk beside him to keep him steady, for he was still a
     little top-heavy. When we came to the door, I opened it, and led him
     into the front room. I give you my word that all the way, the father
     and the daughter were walking in front of us.

     "'It's infernally dark,' said he, stamping about.

     "'We'll soon have a light,' I said, striking a match and putting it
     to a wax candle which I had brought with me. 'Now, Enoch Drebber,' I
     continued, turning to him, and holding the light to my own face, 'who
     am I?'

     "He gazed at me with bleared, drunken eyes for a moment, and then I
     saw a horror spring up in them, and convulse his whole features,
     which showed me that he knew me. He staggered back with a livid face,
     and I saw the perspiration break out upon his brow, while his teeth
     chattered in his head. At the sight, I leaned my back against the
     door and laughed loud and long. I had always known that vengeance
     would be sweet, but I had never hoped for the contentment of soul
     which now possessed me.

     "'You dog!' I said; 'I have hunted you from Salt Lake City to St.
     Petersburg, and you have always escaped me. Now, at last your
     wanderings have come to an end, for either you or I shall never see
     to-morrow's sun rise.' He shrunk still further away as I spoke, and I
     could see on his face that he thought I was mad. So I was for the
     time. The pulses in my temples beat like sledge-hammers, and I
     believe I would have had a fit of some sort if the blood had not
     gushed from my nose and relieved me.

     "'What do you think of Lucy Ferrier now?' I cried, locking the door,
     and shaking the key in his face. 'Punishment has been slow in coming,
     but it has overtaken you at last.' I saw his coward lips tremble as I
     spoke. He would have begged for his life, but he knew well that it
     was useless.

     "'Would you murder me?' he stammered.

     "'There is no murder,' I answered. 'Who talks of murdering a mad dog?
     What mercy had you upon my poor darling, when you dragged her from
     her slaughtered father, and bore her away to your accursed and
     shameless harem.'

     "'It was not I who killed her father,' he cried.

     "'But it was you who broke her innocent heart,' I shrieked, thrusting
     the box before him. 'Let the high God judge between us. Choose and
     eat. There is death in one and life in the other. I shall take what
     you leave. Let us see if there is justice upon the earth, or if we
     are ruled by chance.'

     "He cowered away with wild cries and prayers for mercy, but I drew my
     knife and held it to his throat until he had obeyed me. Then I
     swallowed the other, and we stood facing one another in silence for a
     minute or more, waiting to see which was to live and which was to
     die. Shall I ever forget the look which came over his face when the
     first warning pangs told him that the poison was in his system? I
     laughed as I saw it, and held Lucy's marriage ring in front of his
     eyes. It was but for a moment, for the action of the alkaloid is
     rapid. A spasm of pain contorted his features; he threw his hands out
     in front of him, staggered, and then, with a hoarse cry, fell heavily
     upon the floor. I turned him over with my foot, and placed my hand
     upon his heart. There was no movement. He was dead!

     "The blood had been streaming from my nose, but I had taken no notice
     of it. I don't know what it was that put it into my head to write
     upon the wall with it. Perhaps it was some mischievous idea of
     setting the police upon a wrong track, for I felt light-hearted and
     cheerful. I remembered a German being found in New York with RACHE
     written up above him, and it was argued at the time in the newspapers
     that the secret societies must have done it. I guessed that what
     puzzled the New Yorkers would puzzle the Londoners, so I dipped my
     finger in my own blood and printed it on a convenient place on the
     wall. Then I walked down to my cab and found that there was nobody
     about, and that the night was still very wild. I had driven some
     distance when I put my hand into the pocket in which I usually kept
     Lucy's ring, and found that it was not there. I was thunderstruck at
     this, for it was the only memento that I had of her. Thinking that I
     might have dropped it when I stooped over Drebber's body, I drove
     back, and leaving my cab in a side street, I went boldly up to the
     house--for I was ready to dare anything rather than lose the ring.
     When I arrived there, I walked right into the arms of a
     police-officer who was coming out, and only managed to disarm his
     suspicions by pretending to be hopelessly drunk.

     "That was how Enoch Drebber came to his end. All I had to do then was
     to do as much for Stangerson, and so pay off John Ferrier's debt. I
     knew that he was staying at Halliday's Private Hotel, and I hung
     about all day, but he never came out. I fancy that he suspected
     something when Drebber failed to put in an appearance. He was
     cunning, was Stangerson, and always on his guard. If he thought he
     could keep me off by staying indoors he was very much mistaken. I
     soon found out which was the window of his bedroom, and early next
     morning I took advantage of some ladders which were lying in the lane
     behind the hotel, and so made my way into his room in the grey of the
     dawn. I woke him up and told him that the hour had come when he was
     to answer for the life he had taken so long before. I described
     Drebber's death to him, and I gave him the same choice of the
     poisoned pills. Instead of grasping at the chance of safety which
     that offered him, he sprang from his bed and flew at my throat. In
     self-defence I stabbed him to the heart. It would have been the same
     in any case, for Providence would never have allowed his guilty hand
     to pick out anything but the poison.

     "I have little more to say, and it's as well, for I am about done up.
     I went on cabbing it for a day or so, intending to keep at it until I
     could save enough to take me back to America. I was standing in the
     yard when a ragged youngster asked if there was a cabby there called
     Jefferson Hope, and said that his cab was wanted by a gentleman at
     221b, Baker Street. I went round, suspecting no harm, and the next
     thing I knew, this young man here had the bracelets on my wrists, and
     as neatly snackled as ever I saw in my life. That's the whole of my
     story, gentlemen. You may consider me to be a murderer; but I hold
     that I am just as much an officer of justice as you are."

     So thrilling had the man's narrative been, and his manner was so
     impressive that we had sat silent and absorbed. Even the professional
     detectives, blase as they were in every detail of crime, appeared to
     be keenly interested in the man's story. When he finished we sat for
     some minutes in a stillness which was only broken by the scratching
     of Lestrade's pencil as he gave the finishing touches to his
     shorthand account.

     "There is only one point on which I should like a little more
     information," Sherlock Holmes said at last. "Who was your accomplice
     who came for the ring which I advertised?"

     The prisoner winked at my friend jocosely. "I can tell my own
     secrets," he said, "but I don't get other people into trouble. I saw
     your advertisement, and I thought it might be a plant, or it might be
     the ring which I wanted. My friend volunteered to go and see. I think
     you'll own he did it smartly."

     "Not a doubt of that," said Holmes heartily.

     "Now, gentlemen," the Inspector remarked gravely, "the forms of the
     law must be complied with. On Thursday the prisoner will be brought
     before the magistrates, and your attendance will be required. Until
     then I will be responsible for him." He rang the bell as he spoke,
     and Jefferson Hope was led off by a couple of warders, while my
     friend and I made our way out of the Station and took a cab back to
     Baker Street.





          CHAPTER VII
          The Conclusion


     We had all been warned to appear before the magistrates upon the
     Thursday; but when the Thursday came there was no occasion for our
     testimony. A higher Judge had taken the matter in hand, and Jefferson
     Hope had been summoned before a tribunal where strict justice would
     be meted out to him. On the very night after his capture the aneurism
     burst, and he was found in the morning stretched upon the floor of
     the cell, with a placid smile upon his face, as though he had been
     able in his dying moments to look back upon a useful life, and on
     work well done.

     "Gregson and Lestrade will be wild about his death," Holmes remarked,
     as we chatted it over next evening. "Where will their grand
     advertisement be now?"

     "I don't see that they had very much to do with his capture," I
     answered.

     "What you do in this world is a matter of no consequence," returned
     my companion, bitterly. "The question is, what can you make people
     believe that you have done. Never mind," he continued, more brightly,
     after a pause. "I would not have missed the investigation for
     anything. There has been no better case within my recollection.
     Simple as it was, there were several most instructive points about
     it."

     "Simple!" I ejaculated.

     "Well, really, it can hardly be described as otherwise," said
     Sherlock Holmes, smiling at my surprise. "The proof of its intrinsic
     simplicity is, that without any help save a few very ordinary
     deductions I was able to lay my hand upon the criminal within three
     days."

     "That is true," said I.

     "I have already explained to you that what is out of the common is
     usually a guide rather than a hindrance. In solving a problem of this
     sort, the grand thing is to be able to reason backwards. That is a
     very useful accomplishment, and a very easy one, but people do not
     practise it much. In the every-day affairs of life it is more useful
     to reason forwards, and so the other comes to be neglected. There are
     fifty who can reason synthetically for one who can reason
     analytically."

     "I confess," said I, "that I do not quite follow you."

     "I hardly expected that you would. Let me see if I can make it
     clearer. Most people, if you describe a train of events to them, will
     tell you what the result would be. They can put those events together
     in their minds, and argue from them that something will come to pass.
     There are few people, however, who, if you told them a result, would
     be able to evolve from their own inner consciousness what the steps
     were which led up to that result. This power is what I mean when I
     talk of reasoning backwards, or analytically."

     "I understand," said I.

     "Now this was a case in which you were given the result and had to
     find everything else for yourself. Now let me endeavour to show you
     the different steps in my reasoning. To begin at the beginning. I
     approached the house, as you know, on foot, and with my mind entirely
     free from all impressions. I naturally began by examining the
     roadway, and there, as I have already explained to you, I saw clearly
     the marks of a cab, which, I ascertained by inquiry, must have been
     there during the night. I satisfied myself that it was a cab and not
     a private carriage by the narrow gauge of the wheels. The ordinary
     London growler is considerably less wide than a gentleman's brougham.

     "This was the first point gained. I then walked slowly down the
     garden path, which happened to be composed of a clay soil, peculiarly
     suitable for taking impressions. No doubt it appeared to you to be a
     mere trampled line of slush, but to my trained eyes every mark upon
     its surface had a meaning. There is no branch of detective science
     which is so important and so much neglected as the art of tracing
     footsteps. Happily, I have always laid great stress upon it, and much
     practice has made it second nature to me. I saw the heavy footmarks
     of the constables, but I saw also the track of the two men who had
     first passed through the garden. It was easy to tell that they had
     been before the others, because in places their marks had been
     entirely obliterated by the others coming upon the top of them. In
     this way my second link was formed, which told me that the nocturnal
     visitors were two in number, one remarkable for his height (as I
     calculated from the length of his stride), and the other fashionably
     dressed, to judge from the small and elegant impression left by his
     boots.

     "On entering the house this last inference was confirmed. My
     well-booted man lay before me. The tall one, then, had done the
     murder, if murder there was. There was no wound upon the dead man's
     person, but the agitated expression upon his face assured me that he
     had foreseen his fate before it came upon him. Men who die from heart
     disease, or any sudden natural cause, never by any chance exhibit
     agitation upon their features. Having sniffed the dead man's lips I
     detected a slightly sour smell, and I came to the conclusion that he
     had had poison forced upon him. Again, I argued that it had been
     forced upon him from the hatred and fear expressed upon his face. By
     the method of exclusion, I had arrived at this result, for no other
     hypothesis would meet the facts. Do not imagine that it was a very
     unheard of idea. The forcible administration of poison is by no means
     a new thing in criminal annals. The cases of Dolsky in Odessa, and of
     Leturier in Montpellier, will occur at once to any toxicologist.

     "And now came the great question as to the reason why. Robbery had
     not been the object of the murder, for nothing was taken. Was it
     politics, then, or was it a woman? That was the question which
     confronted me. I was inclined from the first to the latter
     supposition. Political assassins are only too glad to do their work
     and to fly. This murder had, on the contrary, been done most
     deliberately, and the perpetrator had left his tracks all over the
     room, showing that he had been there all the time. It must have been
     a private wrong, and not a political one, which called for such a
     methodical revenge. When the inscription was discovered upon the wall
     I was more inclined than ever to my opinion. The thing was too
     evidently a blind. When the ring was found, however, it settled the
     question. Clearly the murderer had used it to remind his victim of
     some dead or absent woman. It was at this point that I asked Gregson
     whether he had enquired in his telegram to Cleveland as to any
     particular point in Mr. Drebber's former career. He answered, you
     remember, in the negative.

     "I then proceeded to make a careful examination of the room, which
     confirmed me in my opinion as to the murderer's height, and furnished
     me with the additional details as to the Trichinopoly cigar and the
     length of his nails. I had already come to the conclusion, since
     there were no signs of a struggle, that the blood which covered the
     floor had burst from the murderer's nose in his excitement. I could
     perceive that the track of blood coincided with the track of his
     feet. It is seldom that any man, unless he is very full-blooded,
     breaks out in this way through emotion, so I hazarded the opinion
     that the criminal was probably a robust and ruddy-faced man. Events
     proved that I had judged correctly.

     "Having left the house, I proceeded to do what Gregson had neglected.
     I telegraphed to the head of the police at Cleveland, limiting my
     enquiry to the circumstances connected with the marriage of Enoch
     Drebber. The answer was conclusive. It told me that Drebber had
     already applied for the protection of the law against an old rival in
     love, named Jefferson Hope, and that this same Hope was at present in
     Europe. I knew now that I held the clue to the mystery in my hand,
     and all that remained was to secure the murderer.

     "I had already determined in my own mind that the man who had walked
     into the house with Drebber, was none other than the man who had
     driven the cab. The marks in the road showed me that the horse had
     wandered on in a way which would have been impossible had there been
     anyone in charge of it. Where, then, could the driver be, unless he
     were inside the house? Again, it is absurd to suppose that any sane
     man would carry out a deliberate crime under the very eyes, as it
     were, of a third person, who was sure to betray him. Lastly,
     supposing one man wished to dog another through London, what better
     means could he adopt than to turn cabdriver. All these considerations
     led me to the irresistible conclusion that Jefferson Hope was to be
     found among the jarveys of the Metropolis.

     "If he had been one there was no reason to believe that he had ceased
     to be. On the contrary, from his point of view, any sudden chance
     would be likely to draw attention to himself. He would, probably, for
     a time at least, continue to perform his duties. There was no reason
     to suppose that he was going under an assumed name. Why should he
     change his name in a country where no one knew his original one? I
     therefore organized my Street Arab detective corps, and sent them
     systematically to every cab proprietor in London until they ferreted
     out the man that I wanted. How well they succeeded, and how quickly I
     took advantage of it, are still fresh in your recollection. The
     murder of Stangerson was an incident which was entirely unexpected,
     but which could hardly in any case have been prevented. Through it,
     as you know, I came into possession of the pills, the existence of
     which I had already surmised. You see the whole thing is a chain of
     logical sequences without a break or flaw."

     "It is wonderful!" I cried. "Your merits should be publicly
     recognized. You should publish an account of the case. If you won't,
     I will for you."

     "You may do what you like, Doctor," he answered. "See here!" he
     continued, handing a paper over to me, "look at this!"

     It was the Echo for the day, and the paragraph to which he pointed
     was devoted to the case in question.

     "The public," it said, "have lost a sensational treat through the
     sudden death of the man Hope, who was suspected of the murder of Mr.
     Enoch Drebber and of Mr. Joseph Stangerson. The details of the case
     will probably be never known now, though we are informed upon good
     authority that the crime was the result of an old standing and
     romantic feud, in which love and Mormonism bore a part. It seems that
     both the victims belonged, in their younger days, to the Latter Day
     Saints, and Hope, the deceased prisoner, hails also from Salt Lake
     City. If the case has had no other effect, it, at least, brings out
     in the most striking manner the efficiency of our detective police
     force, and will serve as a lesson to all foreigners that they will do
     wisely to settle their feuds at home, and not to carry them on to
     British soil. It is an open secret that the credit of this smart
     capture belongs entirely to the well-known Scotland Yard officials,
     Messrs. Lestrade and Gregson. The man was apprehended, it appears, in
     the rooms of a certain Mr. Sherlock Holmes, who has himself, as an
     amateur, shown some talent in the detective line, and who, with such
     instructors, may hope in time to attain to some degree of their
     skill. It is expected that a testimonial of some sort will be
     presented to the two officers as a fitting recognition of their
     services."

     "Didn't I tell you so when we started?" cried Sherlock Holmes with a
     laugh. "That's the result of all our Study in Scarlet: to get them a
     testimonial!"

     "Never mind," I answered, "I have all the facts in my journal, and
     the public shall know them. In the meantime you must make yourself
     contented by the consciousness of success, like the Roman miser--

                      "'Populus me sibilat, at mihi plaudo
                 Ipse domi simul ac nummos contemplar in arca.'"






                              THE SIGN OF THE FOUR





                                Table of contents
        The Science of Deduction
        The Statement of the Case
        In Quest of a Solution
        The Story of the Bald-Headed Man
        The Tragedy of Pondicherry Lodge
        Sherlock Holmes Gives a Demonstration
        The Episode of the Barrel
        The Baker Street Irregulars
        A Break in the Chain
        The End of the Islander
        The Great Agra Treasure
        The Strange Story of Jonathan Small















          CHAPTER I
          The Science of Deduction


     Sherlock Holmes took his bottle from the corner of the mantelpiece
     and his hypodermic syringe from its neat morocco case. With his long,
     white, nervous fingers he adjusted the delicate needle, and rolled
     back his left shirt-cuff. For some little time his eyes rested
     thoughtfully upon the sinewy forearm and wrist all dotted and scarred
     with innumerable puncture-marks. Finally he thrust the sharp point
     home, pressed down the tiny piston, and sank back into the
     velvet-lined arm-chair with a long sigh of satisfaction.

     Three times a day for many months I had witnessed this performance,
     but custom had not reconciled my mind to it. On the contrary, from
     day to day I had become more irritable at the sight, and my
     conscience swelled nightly within me at the thought that I had lacked
     the courage to protest. Again and again I had registered a vow that I
     should deliver my soul upon the subject, but there was that in the
     cool, nonchalant air of my companion which made him the last man with
     whom one would care to take anything approaching to a liberty. His
     great powers, his masterly manner, and the experience which I had had
     of his many extraordinary qualities, all made me diffident and
     backward in crossing him.

     Yet upon that afternoon, whether it was the Beaune which I had taken
     with my lunch, or the additional exasperation produced by the extreme
     deliberation of his manner, I suddenly felt that I could hold out no
     longer.

     "Which is it to-day?" I asked,--"morphine or cocaine?"

     He raised his eyes languidly from the old black-letter volume which
     he had opened. "It is cocaine," he said,--"a seven-per-cent solution.
     Would you care to try it?"

     "No, indeed," I answered, brusquely. "My constitution has not got
     over the Afghan campaign yet. I cannot afford to throw any extra
     strain upon it."

     He smiled at my vehemence. "Perhaps you are right, Watson," he said.
     "I suppose that its influence is physically a bad one. I find it,
     however, so transcendently stimulating and clarifying to the mind
     that its secondary action is a matter of small moment."

     "But consider!" I said, earnestly. "Count the cost! Your brain may,
     as you say, be roused and excited, but it is a pathological and
     morbid process, which involves increased tissue-change and may at
     last leave a permanent weakness. You know, too, what a black reaction
     comes upon you. Surely the game is hardly worth the candle. Why
     should you, for a mere passing pleasure, risk the loss of those great
     powers with which you have been endowed?  Remember that I speak not
     only as one comrade to another, but as a medical man to one for whose
     constitution he is to some extent answerable."

     He did not seem offended. On the contrary, he put his fingertips
     together and leaned his elbows on the arms of his chair, like one who
     has a relish for conversation.

     "My mind," he said, "rebels at stagnation. Give me problems, give me
     work, give me the most abstruse cryptogram or the most intricate
     analysis, and I am in my own proper atmosphere. I can dispense then
     with artificial stimulants. But I abhor the dull routine of
     existence. I crave for mental exaltation. That is why I have chosen
     my own particular profession,--or rather created it, for I am the
     only one in the world."

     "The only unofficial detective?" I said, raising my eyebrows.

     "The only unofficial consulting detective," he answered.  "I am the
     last and highest court of appeal in detection. When Gregson or
     Lestrade or Athelney Jones are out of their depths--which, by the
     way, is their normal state--the matter is laid before me. I examine
     the data, as an expert, and pronounce a specialist's opinion. I claim
     no credit in such cases. My name figures in no newspaper. The work
     itself, the pleasure of finding a field for my peculiar powers, is my
     highest reward. But you have yourself had some experience of my
     methods of work in the Jefferson Hope case."

     "Yes, indeed," said I, cordially. "I was never so struck by anything
     in my life. I even embodied it in a small brochure with the somewhat
     fantastic title of 'A Study in Scarlet.'"

     He shook his head sadly. "I glanced over it," said he.  "Honestly, I
     cannot congratulate you upon it. Detection is, or ought to be, an
     exact science, and should be treated in the same cold and unemotional
     manner. You have attempted to tinge it with romanticism, which
     produces much the same effect as if you worked a love-story or an
     elopement into the fifth proposition of Euclid."

     "But the romance was there," I remonstrated. "I could not tamper with
     the facts."

     "Some facts should be suppressed, or at least a just sense of
     proportion should be observed in treating them. The only point in the
     case which deserved mention was the curious analytical reasoning from
     effects to causes by which I succeeded in unraveling it."

     I was annoyed at this criticism of a work which had been specially
     designed to please him. I confess, too, that I was irritated by the
     egotism which seemed to demand that every line of my pamphlet should
     be devoted to his own special doings. More than once during the years
     that I had lived with him in Baker Street I had observed that a small
     vanity underlay my companion's quiet and didactic manner. I made no
     remark, however, but sat nursing my wounded leg. I had a Jezail
     bullet through it some time before, and, though it did not prevent me
     from walking, it ached wearily at every change of the weather.

     "My practice has extended recently to the Continent," said Holmes,
     after a while, filling up his old brier-root pipe. "I was consulted
     last week by Francois Le Villard, who, as you probably know, has come
     rather to the front lately in the French detective service. He has
     all the Celtic power of quick intuition, but he is deficient in the
     wide range of exact knowledge which is essential to the higher
     developments of his art. The case was concerned with a will, and
     possessed some features of interest. I was able to refer him to two
     parallel cases, the one at Riga in 1857, and the other at St. Louis
     in 1871, which have suggested to him the true solution. Here is the
     letter which I had this morning acknowledging my assistance." He
     tossed over, as he spoke, a crumpled sheet of foreign notepaper. I
     glanced my eyes down it, catching a profusion of notes of admiration,
     with stray magnifiques, coup-de-matres and tours-de-force, all
     testifying to the ardent admiration of the Frenchman.

     "He speaks as a pupil to his master," said I.

     "Oh, he rates my assistance too highly," said Sherlock Holmes,
     lightly. "He has considerable gifts himself. He possesses two out of
     the three qualities necessary for the ideal detective. He has the
     power of observation and that of deduction. He is only wanting in
     knowledge; and that may come in time. He is now translating my small
     works into French."

     "Your works?"

     "Oh, didn't you know?" he cried, laughing. "Yes, I have been guilty
     of several monographs. They are all upon technical subjects. Here,
     for example, is one 'Upon the Distinction between the Ashes of the
     Various Tobaccoes.' In it I enumerate a hundred and forty forms of
     cigar-, cigarette-, and pipe-tobacco, with colored plates
     illustrating the difference in the ash. It is a point which is
     continually turning up in criminal trials, and which is sometimes of
     supreme importance as a clue. If you can say definitely, for example,
     that some murder has been done by a man who was smoking an Indian
     lunkah, it obviously narrows your field of search. To the trained eye
     there is as much difference between the black ash of a Trichinopoly
     and the white fluff of bird's-eye as there is between a cabbage and a
     potato."

     "You have an extraordinary genius for minutiae," I remarked.

     "I appreciate their importance. Here is my monograph upon the tracing
     of footsteps, with some remarks upon the uses of plaster of Paris as
     a preserver of impresses. Here, too, is a curious little work upon
     the influence of a trade upon the form of the hand, with lithotypes
     of the hands of slaters, sailors, corkcutters, compositors, weavers,
     and diamond-polishers. That is a matter of great practical interest
     to the scientific detective,--especially in cases of unclaimed
     bodies, or in discovering the antecedents of criminals. But I weary
     you with my hobby."

     "Not at all," I answered, earnestly. "It is of the greatest interest
     to me, especially since I have had the opportunity of observing your
     practical application of it. But you spoke just now of observation
     and deduction. Surely the one to some extent implies the other."

     "Why, hardly," he answered, leaning back luxuriously in his armchair,
     and sending up thick blue wreaths from his pipe. "For example,
     observation shows me that you have been to the Wigmore Street
     Post-Office this morning, but deduction lets me know that when there
     you dispatched a telegram."

     "Right!" said I. "Right on both points! But I confess that I don't
     see how you arrived at it. It was a sudden impulse upon my part, and
     I have mentioned it to no one."

     "It is simplicity itself," he remarked, chuckling at my
     surprise,--"so absurdly simple that an explanation is superfluous;
     and yet it may serve to define the limits of observation and of
     deduction. Observation tells me that you have a little reddish mould
     adhering to your instep. Just opposite the Seymour Street Office they
     have taken up the pavement and thrown up some earth which lies in
     such a way that it is difficult to avoid treading in it in entering.
     The earth is of this peculiar reddish tint which is found, as far as
     I know, nowhere else in the neighborhood. So much is observation. The
     rest is deduction."

     "How, then, did you deduce the telegram?"

     "Why, of course I knew that you had not written a letter, since I sat
     opposite to you all morning. I see also in your open desk there that
     you have a sheet of stamps and a thick bundle of postcards.  What
     could you go into the post-office for, then, but to send a wire?
     Eliminate all other factors, and the one which remains must be the
     truth."

     "In this case it certainly is so," I replied, after a little thought.
     "The thing, however, is, as you say, of the simplest.  Would you
     think me impertinent if I were to put your theories to a more severe
     test?"

     "On the contrary," he answered, "it would prevent me from taking a
     second dose of cocaine. I should be delighted to look into any
     problem which you might submit to me."

     "I have heard you say that it is difficult for a man to have any
     object in daily use without leaving the impress of his individuality
     upon it in such a way that a trained observer might read it. Now, I
     have here a watch which has recently come into my possession. Would
     you have the kindness to let me have an opinion upon the character or
     habits of the late owner?"

     I handed him over the watch with some slight feeling of amusement in
     my heart, for the test was, as I thought, an impossible one, and I
     intended it as a lesson against the somewhat dogmatic tone which he
     occasionally assumed. He balanced the watch in his hand, gazed hard
     at the dial, opened the back, and examined the works, first with his
     naked eyes and then with a powerful convex lens. I could hardly keep
     from smiling at his crestfallen face when he finally snapped the case
     to and handed it back.

     "There are hardly any data," he remarked. "The watch has been
     recently cleaned, which robs me of my most suggestive facts."

     "You are right," I answered. "It was cleaned before being sent to
     me." In my heart I accused my companion of putting forward a most
     lame and impotent excuse to cover his failure. What data could he
     expect from an uncleaned watch?

     "Though unsatisfactory, my research has not been entirely barren," he
     observed, staring up at the ceiling with dreamy, lack-lustre eyes.
     "Subject to your correction, I should judge that the watch belonged
     to your elder brother, who inherited it from your father."

     "That you gather, no doubt, from the H. W. upon the back?"

     "Quite so. The W. suggests your own name. The date of the watch is
     nearly fifty years back, and the initials are as old as the watch: so
     it was made for the last generation. Jewelry usually descents to the
     eldest son, and he is most likely to have the same name as the
     father. Your father has, if I remember right, been dead many years.
     It has, therefore, been in the hands of your eldest brother."

     "Right, so far," said I. "Anything else?"

     "He was a man of untidy habits,--very untidy and careless. He was
     left with good prospects, but he threw away his chances, lived for
     some time in poverty with occasional short intervals of prosperity,
     and finally, taking to drink, he died. That is all I can gather."

     I sprang from my chair and limped impatiently about the room with
     considerable bitterness in my heart.

     "This is unworthy of you, Holmes," I said. "I could not have believed
     that you would have descended to this. You have made inquires into
     the history of my unhappy brother, and you now pretend to deduce this
     knowledge in some fanciful way. You cannot expect me to believe that
     you have read all this from his old watch! It is unkind, and, to
     speak plainly, has a touch of charlatanism in it."

     "My dear doctor," said he, kindly, "pray accept my apologies. 
     Viewing the matter as an abstract problem, I had forgotten how
     personal and painful a thing it might be to you. I assure you,
     however, that I never even know that you had a brother until you
     handed me the watch."

     "Then how in the name of all that is wonderful did you get these
     facts? They are absolutely correct in every particular."

     "Ah, that is good luck. I could only say what was the balance of
     probability. I did not at all expect to be so accurate."

     "But it was not mere guess-work?"

     "No, no: I never guess. It is a shocking habit,--destructive to the
     logical faculty. What seems strange to you is only so because you do
     not follow my train of thought or observe the small facts upon which
     large inferences may depend. For example, I began by stating that
     your brother was careless. When you observe the lower part of that
     watch-case you notice that it is not only dinted in two places, but
     it is cut and marked all over from the habit of keeping other hard
     objects, such as coins or keys, in the same pocket. Surely it is no
     great feat to assume that a man who treats a fifty-guinea watch so
     cavalierly must be a careless man. Neither is it a very far-fetched
     inference that a man who inherits one article of such value is pretty
     well provided for in other respects."

     I nodded, to show that I followed his reasoning.

     "It is very customary for pawnbrokers in England, when they take a
     watch, to scratch the number of the ticket with a pin-point upon the
     inside of the case. It is more handy than a label, as there is no
     risk of the number being lost or transposed. There are no less than
     four such numbers visible to my lens on the inside of this case.
     Inference,--that your brother was often at low water. Secondary
     inference,--that he had occasional bursts of prosperity, or he could
     not have redeemed the pledge. Finally, I ask you to look at the inner
     plate, which contains the key-hole. Look at the thousands of
     scratches all round the hole,--marks where the key has slipped. What
     sober man's key could have scored those grooves? But you will never
     see a drunkard's watch without them. He winds it at night, and he
     leaves these traces of his unsteady hand. Where is the mystery in all
     this?"

     "It is as clear as daylight," I answered. "I regret the injustice
     which I did you. I should have had more faith in your marvellous
     faculty. May I ask whether you have any professional inquiry on foot
     at present?"

     "None. Hence the cocaine. I cannot live without brain-work. What else
     is there to live for? Stand at the window here. Was ever such a
     dreary, dismal, unprofitable world? See how the yellow fog swirls
     down the street and drifts across the duncolored houses. What could
     be more hopelessly prosaic and material? What is the use of having
     powers, doctor, when one has no field upon which to exert them? Crime
     is commonplace, existence is commonplace, and no qualities save those
     which are commonplace have any function upon earth."

     I had opened my mouth to reply to this tirade, when with a crisp
     knock our landlady entered, bearing a card upon the brass salver.

     "A young lady for you, sir," she said, addressing my companion.

     "Miss Mary Morstan," he read. "Hum! I have no recollection of the
     name. Ask the young lady to step up, Mrs. Hudson. Don't go, doctor. I
     should prefer that you remain."





          CHAPTER II
          The Statement of the Case


     Miss Morstan entered the room with a firm step and an outward
     composure of manner. She was a blonde young lady, small, dainty, well
     gloved, and dressed in the most perfect taste. There was, however, a
     plainness and simplicity about her costume which bore with it a
     suggestion of limited means. The dress was a sombre grayish beige,
     untrimmed and unbraided, and she wore a small turban of the same dull
     hue, relieved only by a suspicion of white feather in the side. Her
     face had neither regularity of feature nor beauty of complexion, but
     her expression was sweet and amiable, and her large blue eyes were
     singularly spiritual and sympathetic. In an experience of women which
     extends over many nations and three separate continents, I have never
     looked upon a face which gave a clearer promise of a refined and
     sensitive nature. I could not but observe that as she took the seat
     which Sherlock Holmes placed for her, her lip trembled, her hand
     quivered, and she showed every sign of intense inward agitation.

     "I have come to you, Mr. Holmes," she said, "because you once enabled
     my employer, Mrs. Cecil Forrester, to unravel a little domestic
     complication. She was much impressed by your kindness and skill."

     "Mrs. Cecil Forrester," he repeated thoughtfully. "I believe that I
     was of some slight service to her. The case, however, as I remember
     it, was a very simple one."

     "She did not think so. But at least you cannot say the same of mine.
     I can hardly imagine anything more strange, more utterly
     inexplicable, than the situation in which I find myself."

     Holmes rubbed his hands, and his eyes glistened. He leaned forward in
     his chair with an expression of extraordinary concentration upon his
     clear-cut, hawklike features. "State your case," said he, in brisk,
     business tones.

     I felt that my position was an embarrassing one. "You will, I am
     sure, excuse me," I said, rising from my chair.

     To my surprise, the young lady held up her gloved hand to detain me.
     "If your friend," she said, "would be good enough to stop, he might
     be of inestimable service to me."

     I relapsed into my chair.

     "Briefly," she continued, "the facts are these. My father was an
     officer in an Indian regiment who sent me home when I was quite a
     child. My mother was dead, and I had no relative in England. I was
     placed, however, in a comfortable boarding establishment at
     Edinburgh, and there I remained until I was seventeen years of age.
     In the year 1878 my father, who was senior captain of his regiment,
     obtained twelve months' leave and came home. He telegraphed to me
     from London that he had arrived all safe, and directed me to come
     down at once, giving the Langham Hotel as his address. His message,
     as I remember, was full of kindness and love. On reaching London I
     drove to the Langham, and was informed that Captain Morstan was
     staying there, but that he had gone out the night before and had not
     yet returned. I waited all day without news of him. That night, on
     the advice of the manager of the hotel, I communicated with the
     police, and next morning we advertised in all the papers. Our
     inquiries let to no result; and from that day to this no word has
     ever been heard of my unfortunate father. He came home with his heart
     full of hope, to find some peace, some comfort, and instead--" She
     put her hand to her throat, and a choking sob cut short the sentence.

     "The date?" asked Holmes, opening his note-book.

     "He disappeared upon the 3d of December, 1878,--nearly ten years
     ago."

     "His luggage?"

     "Remained at the hotel. There was nothing in it to suggest a
     clue,--some clothes, some books, and a considerable number of
     curiosities from the Andaman Islands. He had been one of the officers
     in charge of the convict-guard there."

     "Had he any friends in town?"

     "Only one that we know of,--Major Sholto, of his own regiment, the
     34th Bombay Infantry. The major had retired some little time before,
     and lived at Upper Norwood. We communicated with him, of course, but
     he did not even know that his brother officer was in England."

     "A singular case," remarked Holmes.

     "I have not yet described to you the most singular part. About six
     years ago--to be exact, upon the 4th of May, 1882--an advertisement
     appeared in the Times asking for the address of Miss Mary Morstan and
     stating that it would be to her advantage to come forward. There was
     no name or address appended. I had at that time just entered the
     family of Mrs. Cecil Forrester in the capacity of governess. By her
     advice I published my address in the advertisement column. The same
     day there arrived through the post a small card-board box addressed
     to me, which I found to contain a very large and lustrous pearl. No
     word of writing was enclosed. Since then every year upon the same
     date there has always appeared a similar box, containing a similar
     pearl, without any clue as to the sender. They have been pronounced
     by an expert to be of a rare variety and of considerable value. You
     can see for yourselves that they are very handsome." She opened a
     flat box as she spoke, and showed me six of the finest pearls that I
     had ever seen.

     "Your statement is most interesting," said Sherlock Holmes.  "Has
     anything else occurred to you?"

     "Yes, and no later than to-day. That is why I have come to you.  This
     morning I received this letter, which you will perhaps read for
     yourself."

     "Thank you," said Holmes. "The envelope too, please. Postmark,
     London, S.W. Date, July 7. Hum! Man's thumb-mark on corner,--probably
     postman. Best quality paper. Envelopes at sixpence a packet.
     Particular man in his stationery. No address. 'Be at the third pillar
     from the left outside the Lyceum Theatre to-night at seven o'clock.
     If you are distrustful, bring two friends. You are a wronged woman,
     and shall have justice. Do not bring police. If you do, all will be
     in vain. Your unknown friend.' Well, really, this is a very pretty
     little mystery.  What do you intend to do, Miss Morstan?"

     "That is exactly what I want to ask you."

     "Then we shall most certainly go. You and I and--yes, why, Dr. 
     Watson is the very man. Your correspondent says two friends. He and I
     have worked together before."

     "But would he come?" she asked, with something appealing in her voice
     and expression.

     "I should be proud and happy," said I, fervently, "if I can be of any
     service."

     "You are both very kind," she answered. "I have led a retired life,
     and have no friends whom I could appeal to. If I am here at six it
     will do, I suppose?"

     "You must not be later," said Holmes. "There is one other point,
     however. Is this handwriting the same as that upon the pearl-box
     addresses?"

     "I have them here," she answered, producing half a dozen pieces of
     paper.

     "You are certainly a model client. You have the correct intuition.
     Let us see, now." He spread out the papers upon the table, and gave
     little darting glances from one to the other. "They are disguised
     hands, except the letter," he said, presently, "but there can be no
     question as to the authorship. See how the irrepressible Greek e will
     break out, and see the twirl of the final s. They are undoubtedly by
     the same person. I should not like to suggest false hopes, Miss
     Morstan, but is there any resemblance between this hand and that of
     your father?"

     "Nothing could be more unlike."

     "I expected to hear you say so. We shall look out for you, then, at
     six. Pray allow me to keep the papers. I may look into the matter
     before then. It is only half-past three. Au revoir, then."

     "Au revoir," said our visitor, and, with a bright, kindly glance from
     one to the other of us, she replaced her pearl-box in her bosom and
     hurried away. Standing at the window, I watched her walking briskly
     down the street, until the gray turban and white feather were but a
     speck in the sombre crowd.

     "What a very attractive woman!" I exclaimed, turning to my companion.

     He had lit his pipe again, and was leaning back with drooping
     eyelids. "Is she?" he said, languidly. "I did not observe."

     "You really are an automaton,--a calculating-machine!" I cried.
     "There is something positively inhuman in you at times."

     He smiled gently. "It is of the first importance," he said, "not to
     allow your judgment to be biased by personal qualities. A client is
     to me a mere unit,--a factor in a problem. The emotional qualities
     are antagonistic to clear reasoning. I assure you that the most
     winning woman I ever knew was hanged for poisoning three little
     children for their insurance-money, and the most repellant man of my
     acquaintance is a philanthropist who has spent nearly a quarter of a
     million upon the London poor."

     "In this case, however--"

     "I never make exceptions. An exception disproves the rule. Have you
     ever had occasion to study character in handwriting? What do you make
     of this fellow's scribble?"

     "It is legible and regular," I answered. "A man of business habits
     and some force of character."

     Holmes shook his head. "Look at his long letters," he said. "They
     hardly rise above the common herd. That d might be an a, and that l
     an e. Men of character always differentiate their long letters,
     however illegibly they may write. There is vacillation in his k's and
     self-esteem in his capitals. I am going out now. I have some few
     references to make. Let me recommend this book,--one of the most
     remarkable ever penned. It is Winwood Reade's Martyrdom of Man. I
     shall be back in an hour."

     I sat in the window with the volume in my hand, but my thoughts were
     far from the daring speculations of the writer. My mind ran upon our
     late visitor,--her smiles, the deep rich tones of her voice, the
     strange mystery which overhung her life. If she were seventeen at the
     time of her father's disappearance she must be seven-and-twenty
     now,--a sweet age, when youth has lost its self-consciousness and
     become a little sobered by experience. So I sat and mused, until such
     dangerous thoughts came into my head that I hurried away to my desk
     and plunged furiously into the latest treatise upon pathology. What
     was I, an army surgeon with a weak leg and a weaker banking-account,
     that I should dare to think of such things? She was a unit, a
     factor,--nothing more. If my future were black, it was better surely
     to face it like a man than to attempt to brighten it by mere
     will-o'-the-wisps of the imagination.





          CHAPTER III
          In Quest of a Solution


     It was half-past five before Holmes returned. He was bright, eager,
     and in excellent spirits,--a mood which in his case alternated with
     fits of the blackest depression.

     "There is no great mystery in this matter," he said, taking the cup
     of tea which I had poured out for him. "The facts appear to admit of
     only one explanation."

     "What! you have solved it already?"

     "Well, that would be too much to say. I have discovered a suggestive
     fact, that is all. It is, however, very suggestive. The details are
     still to be added. I have just found, on consulting the back files of
     the Times, that Major Sholto, of Upper Norword, late of the 34th
     Bombay Infantry, died upon the 28th of April, 1882."

     "I may be very obtuse, Holmes, but I fail to see what this suggests."

     "No? You surprise me. Look at it in this way, then. Captain Morstan
     disappears. The only person in London whom he could have visited is
     Major Sholto. Major Sholto denies having heard that he was in London.
     Four years later Sholto dies. Within a week of his death Captain
     Morstan's daughter receives a valuable present, which is repeated
     from year to year, and now culminates in a letter which describes her
     as a wronged woman. What wrong can it refer to except this
     deprivation of her father? And why should the presents begin
     immediately after Sholto's death, unless it is that Sholto's heir
     knows something of the mystery and desires to make compensation? Have
     you any alternative theory which will meet the facts?"

     "But what a strange compensation! And how strangely made! Why, too,
     should he write a letter now, rather than six years ago? Again, the
     letter speaks of giving her justice. What justice can she have? It is
     too much to suppose that her father is still alive. There is no other
     injustice in her case that you know of."

     "There are difficulties; there are certainly difficulties," said
     Sherlock Holmes, pensively. "But our expedition of to-night will
     solve them all. Ah, here is a four-wheeler, and Miss Morstan is
     inside. Are you all ready? Then we had better go down, for it is a
     little past the hour."

     I picked up my hat and my heaviest stick, but I observed that Holmes
     took his revolver from his drawer and slipped it into his pocket. It
     was clear that he thought that our night's work might be a serious
     one.

     Miss Morstan was muffled in a dark cloak, and her sensitive face was
     composed, but pale. She must have been more than woman if she did not
     feel some uneasiness at the strange enterprise upon which we were
     embarking, yet her self-control was perfect, and she readily answered
     the few additional questions which Sherlock Holmes put to her.

     "Major Sholto was a very particular friend of papa's," she said. "His
     letters were full of allusions to the major. He and papa were in
     command of the troops at the Andaman Islands, so they were thrown a
     great deal together. By the way, a curious paper was found in papa's
     desk which no one could understand. I don't suppose that it is of the
     slightest importance, but I thought you might care to see it, so I
     brought it with me. It is here."

     Holmes unfolded the paper carefully and smoothed it out upon his
     knee. He then very methodically examined it all over with his double
     lens.

     "It is paper of native Indian manufacture," he remarked. "It has at
     some time been pinned to a board. The diagram upon it appears to be a
     plan of part of a large building with numerous halls, corridors, and
     passages. At one point is a small cross done in red ink, and above it
     is '3.37 from left,' in faded pencil-writing.  In the left-hand
     corner is a curious hieroglyphic like four crosses in a line with
     their arms touching. Beside it is written, in very rough and coarse
     characters, 'The sign of the four,--Jonathan Small, Mahomet Singh,
     Abdullah Khan, Dost Akbar.' No, I confess that I do not see how this
     bears upon the matter. Yet it is evidently a document of importance.
     It has been kept carefully in a pocket-book; for the one side is as
     clean as the other."

     "It was in his pocket-book that we found it."

     "Preserve it carefully, then, Miss Morstan, for it may prove to be of
     use to us. I begin to suspect that this matter may turn out to be
     much deeper and more subtle than I at first supposed. I must
     reconsider my ideas." He leaned back in the cab, and I could see by
     his drawn brow and his vacant eye that he was thinking intently. Miss
     Morstan and I chatted in an undertone about our present expedition
     and its possible outcome, but our companion maintained his
     impenetrable reserve until the end of our journey.

     It was a September evening, and not yet seven o'clock, but the day
     had been a dreary one, and a dense drizzly fog lay low upon the great
     city. Mud-colored clouds drooped sadly over the muddy streets. Down
     the Strand the lamps were but misty splotches of diffused light which
     threw a feeble circular glimmer upon the slimy pavement. The yellow
     glare from the shop-windows streamed out into the steamy, vaporous
     air, and threw a murky, shifting radiance across the crowded
     thoroughfare. There was, to my mind, something eerie and ghost-like
     in the endless procession of faces which flitted across these narrow
     bars of light,--sad faces and glad, haggard and merry. Like all human
     kind, they flitted from the gloom into the light, and so back into
     the gloom once more. I am not subject to impressions, but the dull,
     heavy evening, with the strange business upon which we were engaged,
     combined to make me nervous and depressed. I could see from Miss
     Morstan's manner that she was suffering from the same feeling. Holmes
     alone could rise superior to petty influences. He held his open
     note-book upon his knee, and from time to time he jotted down figures
     and memoranda in the light of his pocket-lantern.

     At the Lyceum Theatre the crowds were already thick at the
     side-entrances. In front a continuous stream of hansoms and
     four-wheelers were rattling up, discharging their cargoes of
     shirt-fronted men and beshawled, bediamonded women. We had hardly
     reached the third pillar, which was our rendezvous, before a small,
     dark, brisk man in the dress of a coachman accosted us.

     "Are you the parties who come with Miss Morstan?" he asked.

     "I am Miss Morstan, and these two gentlemen are my friends," said
     she.

     He bent a pair of wonderfully penetrating and questioning eyes upon
     us. "You will excuse me, miss," he said with a certain dogged manner,
     "but I was to ask you to give me your word that neither of your
     companions is a police-officer."

     "I give you my word on that," she answered.

     He gave a shrill whistle, on which a street Arab led across a
     four-wheeler and opened the door. The man who had addressed us
     mounted to the box, while we took our places inside. We had hardly
     done so before the driver whipped up his horse, and we plunged away
     at a furious pace through the foggy streets.

     The situation was a curious one. We were driving to an unknown place,
     on an unknown errand. Yet our invitation was either a complete
     hoax,--which was an inconceivable hypothesis,--or else we had good
     reason to think that important issues might hang upon our journey.
     Miss Morstan's demeanor was as resolute and collected as ever. I
     endeavored to cheer and amuse her by reminiscences of my adventures
     in Afghanistan; but, to tell the truth, I was myself so excited at
     our situation and so curious as to our destination that my stories
     were slightly involved. To this day she declares that I told her one
     moving anecdote as to how a musket looked into my tent at the dead of
     night, and how I fired a double-barrelled tiger cub at it. At first I
     had some idea as to the direction in which we were driving; but soon,
     what with our pace, the fog, and my own limited knowledge of London,
     I lost my bearings, and knew nothing, save that we seemed to be going
     a very long way. Sherlock Holmes was never at fault, however, and he
     muttered the names as the cab rattled through squares and in and out
     by tortuous by-streets.

     "Rochester Row," said he. "Now Vincent Square. Now we come out on the
     Vauxhall Bridge Road. We are making for the Surrey side, apparently.
     Yes, I thought so. Now we are on the bridge. You can catch glimpses
     of the river."

     We did indeed bet a fleeting view of a stretch of the Thames with the
     lamps shining upon the broad, silent water; but our cab dashed on,
     and was soon involved in a labyrinth of streets upon the other side.

     "Wordsworth Road," said my companion. "Priory Road. Lark Hall Lane.
     Stockwell Place. Robert Street. Cold Harbor Lane. Our quest does not
     appear to take us to very fashionable regions."

     We had, indeed, reached a questionable and forbidding neighborhood.
     Long lines of dull brick houses were only relieved by the coarse
     glare and tawdry brilliancy of public houses at the corner. Then came
     rows of two-storied villas each with a fronting of miniature garden,
     and then again interminable lines of new staring brick
     buildings,--the monster tentacles which the giant city was throwing
     out into the country. At last the cab drew up at the third house in a
     new terrace. None of the other houses were inhabited, and that at
     which we stopped was as dark as its neighbors, save for a single
     glimmer in the kitchen window. On our knocking, however, the door was
     instantly thrown open by a Hindoo servant clad in a yellow turban,
     white loose-fitting clothes, and a yellow sash. There was something
     strangely incongruous in this Oriental figure framed in the
     commonplace door-way of a third-rate suburban dwelling-house.

     "The Sahib awaits you," said he, and even as he spoke there came a
     high piping voice from some inner room. "Show them in to me,
     khitmutgar," it cried. "Show them straight in to me."





          CHAPTER IV
          The Story of the Bald-Headed Man


     We followed the Indian down a sordid and common passage, ill lit and
     worse furnished, until he came to a door upon the right, which he
     threw open. A blaze of yellow light streamed out upon us, and in the
     centre of the glare there stood a small man with a very high head, a
     bristle of red hair all round the fringe of it, and a bald, shining
     scalp which shot out from among it like a mountain-peak from
     fir-trees. He writhed his hands together as he stood, and his
     features were in a perpetual jerk, now smiling, now scowling, but
     never for an instant in repose. Nature had given him a pendulous lip,
     and a too visible line of yellow and irregular teeth, which he strove
     feebly to conceal by constantly passing his hand over the lower part
     of his face. In spite of his obtrusive baldness, he gave the
     impression of youth. In point of fact he had just turned his
     thirtieth year.

     "Your servant, Miss Morstan," he kept repeating, in a thin, high
     voice. "Your servant, gentlemen. Pray step into my little sanctum. A
     small place, miss, but furnished to my own liking.  An oasis of art
     in the howling desert of South London."

     We were all astonished by the appearance o the apartment into which
     he invited us. In that sorry house it looked as out of place as a
     diamond of the first water in a setting of brass. The richest and
     glossiest of curtains and tapestries draped the walls, looped back
     here and there to expose some richly-mounted painting or Oriental
     vase. The carpet was of amber-and-black, so soft and so thick that
     the foot sank pleasantly into it, as into a bed of moss. Two great
     tiger-skins thrown athwart it increased the suggestion of Eastern
     luxury, as did a huge hookah which stood upon a mat in the corner. A
     lamp in the fashion of a silver dove was hung from an almost
     invisible golden wire in the centre of the room. As it burned it
     filled the air with a subtle and aromatic odor.

     "Mr. Thaddeus Sholto," said the little man, still jerking and
     smiling. "That is my name. You are Miss Morstan, of course. And these
     gentlemen--"

     "This is Mr. Sherlock Holmes, and this is Dr. Watson."

     "A doctor, eh?" cried he, much excited. "Have you your stethoscope?
     Might I ask you--would you have the kindness? I have grave doubts as
     to my mitral valve, if you would be so very good. The aortic I may
     rely upon, but I should value your opinion upon the mitral."

     I listened to his heart, as requested, but was unable to find
     anything amiss, save indeed that he was in an ecstasy of fear, for he
     shivered from head to foot. "It appears to be normal," I said. "You
     have no cause for uneasiness."

     "You will excuse my anxiety, Miss Morstan," he remarked, airily.  "I
     am a great sufferer, and I have long had suspicions as to that valve.
     I am delighted to hear that they are unwarranted. Had your father,
     Miss Morstan, refrained from throwing a strain upon his heart, he
     might have been alive now."

     I could have struck the man across the face, so hot was I at this
     callous and off-hand reference to so delicate a matter. Miss Morstan
     sat down, and her face grew white to the lips. "I knew in my heart
     that he was dead," said she.

     "I can give you every information," said he, "and, what is more, I
     can do you justice; and I will, too, whatever Brother Bartholomew may
     say. I am so glad to have your friends here, not only as an escort to
     you, but also as witnesses to what I am about to do and say. The
     three of us can show a bold front to Brother Bartholomew. But let us
     have no outsiders,--no police or officials. We can settle everything
     satisfactorily among ourselves, without any interference. Nothing
     would annoy Brother Bartholomew more than any publicity." He sat down
     upon a low settee and blinked at us inquiringly with his weak, watery
     blue eyes.

     "For my part," said Holmes, "whatever you may choose to say will go
     no further."

     I nodded to show my agreement.

     "That is well! That is well!" said he. "May I offer you a glass of
     Chianti, Miss Morstan? Or of Tokay? I keep no other wines. Shall I
     open a flask? No? Well, then, I trust that you have no objection to
     tobacco-smoke, to the mild balsamic odor of the Eastern tobacco. I am
     a little nervous, and I find my hookah an invaluable sedative." He
     applied a taper to the great bowl, and the smoke bubbled merrily
     through the rose-water. We sat all three in a semicircle, with our
     heads advanced, and our chins upon our hands, while the strange,
     jerky little fellow, with his high, shining head, puffed uneasily in
     the centre.

     "When I first determined to make this communication to you," said he,
     "I might have given you my address, but I feared that you might
     disregard my request and bring unpleasant people with you. I took the
     liberty, therefore, of making an appointment in such a way that my
     man Williams might be able to see you first. I have complete
     confidence in his discretion, and he had orders, if he were
     dissatisfied, to proceed no further in the matter. You will excuse
     these precautions, but I am a man of somewhat retiring, and I might
     even say refined, tastes, and there is nothing more unaesthetic than
     a policeman. I have a natural shrinking from all forms of rough
     materialism. I seldom come in contact with the rough crowd. I live,
     as you see, with some little atmosphere of elegance around me. I may
     call myself a patron of the arts. It is my weakness. The landscape is
     a genuine Corot, and, though a connoisseur might perhaps throw a
     doubt upon that Salvator Rosa, there cannot be the least question
     about the Bouguereau. I am partial to the modern French school."

     "You will excuse me, Mr. Sholto," said Miss Morstan, "but I am here
     at your request to learn something which you desire to tell me. It is
     very late, and I should desire the interview to be as short as
     possible."

     "At the best it must take some time," he answered; "for we shall
     certainly have to go to Norwood and see Brother Bartholomew. We shall
     all go and try if we can get the better of Brother Bartholomew. He is
     very angry with me for taking the course which has seemed right to
     me. I had quite high words with him last night. You cannot imagine
     what a terrible fellow he is when he is angry."

     "If we are to go to Norwood it would perhaps be as well to start at
     once," I ventured to remark.

     He laughed until his ears were quite red. "That would hardly do," he
     cried. "I don't know what he would say if I brought you in that
     sudden way. No, I must prepare you by showing you how we all stand to
     each other. In the first place, I must tell you that there are
     several points in the story of which I am myself ignorant. I can only
     lay the facts before you as far as I know them myself.

     "My father was, as you may have guessed, Major John Sholto, once of
     the Indian army. He retired some eleven years ago, and came to live
     at Pondicherry Lodge in Upper Norwood. He had prospered in India, and
     brought back with him a considerable sum of money, a large collection
     of valuable curiosities, and a staff of native servants. With these
     advantages he bought himself a house, and lived in great luxury. My
     twin-brother Bartholomew and I were the only children.

     "I very well remember the sensation which was caused by the
     disappearance of Captain Morstan. We read the details in the papers,
     and, knowing that he had been a friend of our father's, we discussed
     the case freely in his presence. He used to join in our speculations
     as to what could have happened. Never for an instant did we suspect
     that he had the whole secret hidden in his own breast,--that of all
     men he alone knew the fate of Arthur Morstan.

     "We did know, however, that some mystery--some positive
     danger--overhung our father. He was very fearful of going out alone,
     and he always employed two prize-fighters to act as porters at
     Pondicherry Lodge. Williams, who drove you to-night, was one of them.
     He was once light-weight champion of England. Our father would never
     tell us what it was he feared, but he had a most marked aversion to
     men with wooden legs. On one occasion he actually fired his revolver
     at a wooden-legged man, who proved to be a harmless tradesman
     canvassing for orders. We had to pay a large sum to hush the matter
     up. My brother and I used to think this a mere whim of my father's,
     but events have since led us to change our opinion.

     "Early in 1882 my father received a letter from India which was a
     great shock to him. He nearly fainted at the breakfast-table when he
     opened it, and from that day he sickened to his death. What was in
     the letter we could never discover, but I could see as he held it
     that it was short and written in a scrawling hand. He had suffered
     for years from an enlarged spleen, but he now became rapidly worse,
     and towards the end of April we were informed that he was beyond all
     hope, and that he wished to make a last communication to us.

     "When we entered his room he was propped up with pillows and
     breathing heavily. He besought us to lock the door and to come upon
     either side of the bed. Then, grasping our hands, he made a
     remarkable statement to us, in a voice which was broken as much by
     emotion as by pain. I shall try and give it to you in his own very
     words.

     "'I have only one thing,' he said, 'which weighs upon my mind at this
     supreme moment. It is my treatment of poor Morstan's orphan. The
     cursed greed which has been my besetting sin through life has
     withheld from her the treasure, half at least of which should have
     been hers. And yet I have made no use of it myself,--so blind and
     foolish a thing is avarice. The mere feeling of possession has been
     so dear to me that I could not bear to share it with another. See
     that chaplet dipped with pearls beside the quinine-bottle. Even that
     I could not bear to part with, although I had got it out with the
     design of sending it to her. You, my sons, will give her a fair share
     of the Agra treasure. But send her nothing--not even the
     chaplet--until I am gone. After all, men have been as bad as this and
     have recovered.

     "'I will tell you how Morstan died,' he continued. 'He had suffered
     for years from a weak heart, but he concealed it from every one. I
     alone knew it. When in India, he and I, through a remarkable chain of
     circumstances, came into possession of a considerable treasure. I
     brought it over to England, and on the night of Morstan's arrival he
     came straight over here to claim his share. He walked over from the
     station, and was admitted by my faithful Lal Chowdar, who is now
     dead. Morstan and I had a difference of opinion as to the division of
     the treasure, and we came to heated words. Morstan had sprung out of
     his chair in a paroxysm of anger, when he suddenly pressed his hand
     to his side, his face turned a dusky hue, and he fell backwards,
     cutting his head against the corner of the treasure-chest. When I
     stooped over him I found, to my horror, that he was dead.

     "'For a long time I sat half distracted, wondering what I should do.
     My first impulse was, of course, to call for assistance; but I could
     not but recognize that there was every chance that I would be accused
     of his murder. His death at the moment of a quarrel, and the gash in
     his head, would be black against me. Again, an official inquiry could
     not be made without bringing out some facts about the treasure, which
     I was particularly anxious to keep secret. He had told me that no
     soul upon earth knew where he had gone. There seemed to be no
     necessity why any soul ever should know.

     "'I was still pondering over the matter, when, looking up, I saw my
     servant, Lal Chowdar, in the doorway. He stole in and bolted the door
     behind him. "Do not fear, Sahib," he said. "No one need know that you
     have killed him. Let us hide him away, and who is the wiser?" "I did
     not kill him," said I. Lal Chowdar shook his head and smiled. "I
     heard it all, Sahib," said he. "I heard you quarrel, and I heard the
     blow. But my lips are sealed. All are asleep in the house. Let us put
     him away together." That was enough to decide met. If my own servant
     could not believe my innocence, how could I hope to make it good
     before twelve foolish tradesmen in a jury-box? Lal Chowdar and I
     disposed of the body that night, and within a few days the London
     papers were full of the mysterious disappearance of Captain Morstan.
     You will see from what I say that I can hardly be blamed in the
     matter. My fault lies in the fact that we concealed not only the
     body, but also the treasure, and that I have clung to Morstan's share
     as well as to my own. I wish you, therefore, to make restitution. Put
     your ears down to my mouth. The treasure is hidden in--At this
     instant a horrible change came over his expression; his eyes stared
     wildly, his jaw dropped, and he yelled, in a voice which I can never
     forget, 'Keep him out! For Christ's sake keep him out'! We both
     stared round at the window behind us upon which his gaze was fixed. A
     face was looking in at us out of the darkness. We could see the
     whitening of the nose where it was pressed against the glass. It was
     a bearded, hairy face, with wild cruel eyes and an expression of
     concentrated malevolence. My brother and I rushed towards the window,
     but the man was gone. When we returned to my father his head had
     dropped and his pulse had ceased to beat.

     "We searched the garden that night, but found no sign of the
     intruder, save that just under the window a single footmark was
     visible in the flower-bed. But for that one trace, we might have
     thought that our imaginations had conjured up that wild, fierce face.
     We soon, however, had another and a more striking proof that there
     were secret agencies at work all round us. The window of my father's
     room was found open in the morning, his cupboards and boxes had been
     rifled, and upon his chest was fixed a torn piece of paper, with the
     words 'The sign of the four' scrawled across it. What the phrase
     meant, or who our secret visitor may have been, we never knew. As far
     as we can judge, none of my father's property had been actually
     stolen, though everything had been turned out. My brother and I
     naturally associated this peculiar incident with the fear which
     haunted my father during his life; but it is still a complete mystery
     to us."

     The little man stopped to relight his hookah and puffed thoughtfully
     for a few moments. We had all sat absorbed, listening to his
     extraordinary narrative. At the short account of her father's death
     Miss Morstan had turned deadly white, and for a moment I feared that
     she was about to faint. She rallied however, on drinking a glass of
     water which I quietly poured out for her from a Venetian carafe upon
     the side-table. Sherlock Holmes leaned back in his chair with an
     abstracted expression and the lids drawn low over his glittering
     eyes. As I glanced at him I could not but think how on that very day
     he had complained bitterly of the commonplaceness of life. Here at
     least was a problem which would tax his sagacity to the utmost. Mr.
     Thaddeus Sholto looked from one to the other of us with an obvious
     pride at the effect which his story had produced, and then continued
     between the puffs of his overgrown pipe.

     "My brother and I," said he, "were, as you may imagine, much excited
     as to the treasure which my father had spoken of. For weeks and for
     months we dug and delved in every part of the garden, without
     discovering its whereabouts. It was maddening to think that the
     hiding-place was on his very lips at the moment that he died. We
     could judge the splendor of the missing riches by the chaplet which
     he had taken out. Over this chaplet my brother Bartholomew and I had
     some little discussion. The pearls were evidently of great value, and
     he was averse to part with them, for, between friends, my brother was
     himself a little inclined to my father's fault. He thought, too, that
     if we parted with the chaplet it might give rise to gossip and
     finally bring us into trouble. It was all that I could do to persuade
     him to let me find out Miss Morstan's address and send her a detached
     pearl at fixed intervals, so that at least she might never feel
     destitute."

     "It was a kindly thought," said our companion, earnestly. "It was
     extremely good of you."

     The little man waved his hand deprecatingly. "We were your trustees,"
     he said. "That was the view which I took of it, though Brother
     Bartholomew could not altogether see it in that light. We had plenty
     of money ourselves. I desired no more. Besides, it would have been
     such bad taste to have treated a young lady in so scurvy a fashion.
     'Le mauvais got mne au crime.' The French have a very neat way of
     putting these things. Our difference of opinion on this subject went
     so far that I thought it best to set up rooms for myself: so I left
     Pondicherry Lodge, taking the old khitmutgar and Williams with me.
     Yesterday, however, I learn that an event of extreme importance has
     occurred. The treasure has been discovered. I instantly communicated
     with Miss Morstan, and it only remains for us to drive out to Norwood
     and demand our share. I explained my views last night to Brother
     Bartholomew: so we shall be expected, if not welcome, visitors."

     Mr. Thaddeus Sholto ceased, and sat twitching on his luxurious
     settee. We all remained silent, with our thoughts upon the new
     development which the mysterious business had taken. Holmes was the
     first to spring to his feet.

     "You have done well, sir, from first to last," said he. "It is
     possible that we may be able to make you some small return by
     throwing some light upon that which is still dark to you. But, as
     Miss Morstan remarked just now, it is late, and we had best put the
     matter through without delay."

     Our new acquaintance very deliberately coiled up the tube of his
     hookah, and produced from behind a curtain a very long befrogged
     topcoat with Astrakhan collar and cuffs. This he buttoned tightly up,
     in spite of the extreme closeness of the night, and finished his
     attire by putting on a rabbit-skin cap with hanging lappets which
     covered the ears, so that no part of him was visible save his mobile
     and peaky face. "My health is somewhat fragile," he remarked, as he
     led the way down the passage. "I am compelled to be a
     valetudinarian."

     Our cab was awaiting us outside, and our programme was evidently
     prearranged, for the driver started off at once at a rapid pace.
     Thaddeus Sholto talked incessantly, in a voice which rose high above
     the rattle of the wheels.

     "Bartholomew is a clever fellow," said he. "How do you think he found
     out where the treasure was? He had come to the conclusion that it was
     somewhere indoors: so he worked out all the cubic space of the house,
     and made measurements everywhere, so that not one inch should be
     unaccounted for. Among other things, he found that the height of the
     building was seventy-four feet, but on adding together the heights of
     all the separate rooms, and making every allowance for the space
     between, which he ascertained by borings, he could not bring the
     total to more than seventy feet. There were four feet unaccounted
     for. These could only be at the top of the building. He knocked a
     hole, therefore, in the lath-and-plaster ceiling of the highest room,
     and there, sure enough, he came upon another little garret above it,
     which had been sealed up and was known to no one. In the centre stood
     the treasure-chest, resting upon two rafters. He lowered it through
     the hole, and there it lies. He computes the value of the jewels at
     not less than half a million sterling."

     At the mention of this gigantic sum we all stared at one another
     open-eyed. Miss Morstan, could we secure her rights, would change
     from a needy governess to the richest heiress in England. Surely it
     was the place of a loyal friend to rejoice at such news; yet I am
     ashamed to say that selfishness took me by the soul, and that my
     heart turned as heavy as lead within me. I stammered out some few
     halting words of congratulation, and then sat downcast, with my head
     drooped, deaf to the babble of our new acquaintance. He was clearly a
     confirmed hypochondriac, and I was dreamily conscious that he was
     pouring forth interminable trains of symptoms, and imploring
     information as to the composition and action of innumerable quack
     nostrums, some of which he bore about in a leather case in his
     pocket. I trust that he may not remember any of the answers which I
     gave him that night. Holmes declares that he overheard me caution him
     against the great danger of taking more than two drops of castor oil,
     while I recommended strychnine in large doses as a sedative. However
     that may be, I was certainly relieved when our cab pulled up with a
     jerk and the coachman sprang down to open the door.

     "This, Miss Morstan, is Pondicherry Lodge," said Mr. Thaddeus Sholto,
     as he handed her out.





          CHAPTER V
          The Tragedy of Pondicherry Lodge


     It was nearly eleven o'clock when we reached this final stage of our
     night's adventures. We had left the damp fog of the great city behind
     us, and the night was fairly fine. A warm wind blew from the
     westward, and heavy clouds moved slowly across the sky, with half a
     moon peeping occasionally through the rifts. It was clear enough to
     see for some distance, but Thaddeus Sholto took down one of the
     side-lamps from the carriage to give us a better light upon our way.

     Pondicherry Lodge stood in its own grounds, and was girt round with a
     very high stone wall topped with broken glass. A single narrow
     iron-clamped door formed the only means of entrance. On this our
     guide knocked with a peculiar postman-like rat-tat.

     "Who is there?" cried a gruff voice from within.

     "It is I, McMurdo. You surely know my knock by this time."

     There was a grumbling sound and a clanking and jarring of keys. The
     door swung heavily back, and a short, deep-chested man stood in the
     opening, with the yellow light of the lantern shining upon his
     protruded face and twinkling distrustful eyes.

     "That you, Mr. Thaddeus? But who are the others? I had no orders
     about them from the master."

     "No, McMurdo? You surprise me! I told my brother last night that I
     should bring some friends.

     "He ain't been out o' his room to-day, Mr. Thaddeus, and I have no
     orders. You know very well that I must stick to regulations. I can
     let you in, but your friends must just stop where they are."

     This was an unexpected obstacle. Thaddeus Sholto looked about him in
     a perplexed and helpless manner. "This is too bad of you, McMurdo!"
     he said. "If I guarantee them, that is enough for you. There is the
     young lady, too. She cannot wait on the public road at this hour."

     "Very sorry, Mr. Thaddeus," said the porter, inexorably. "Folk may be
     friends o' yours, and yet no friends o' the master's. He pays me well
     to do my duty, and my duty I'll do. I don't know none o' your
     friends."

     "Oh, yes you do, McMurdo," cried Sherlock Holmes, genially. "I don't
     think you can have forgotten me. Don't you remember the amateur who
     fought three rounds with you at Alison's rooms on the night of your
     benefit four years back?"

     "Not Mr. Sherlock Holmes!" roared the prize-fighter. "God's truth!
     how could I have mistook you? If instead o' standin' there so quiet
     you had just stepped up and given me that cross-hit of yours under
     the jaw, I'd ha' known you without a question. Ah, you're one that
     has wasted your gifts, you have! You might have aimed high, if you
     had joined the fancy."

     "You see, Watson, if all else fails me I have still one of the
     scientific professions open to me," said Holmes, laughing. "Our
     friend won't keep us out in the cold now, I am sure."

     "In you come, sir, in you come,--you and your friends," he answered.
     "Very sorry, Mr. Thaddeus, but orders are very strict. Had to be
     certain of your friends before I let them in."

     Inside, a gravel path wound through desolate grounds to a huge clump
     of a house, square and prosaic, all plunged in shadow save where a
     moonbeam struck one corner and glimmered in a garret window. The vast
     size of the building, with its gloom and its deathly silence, struck
     a chill to the heart. Even Thaddeus Sholto seemed ill at ease, and
     the lantern quivered and rattled in his hand.

     "I cannot understand it," he said. "There must be some mistake. I
     distinctly told Bartholomew that we should be here, and yet there is
     no light in his window. I do not know what to make of it."

     "Does he always guard the premises in this way?" asked Holmes.

     "Yes; he has followed my father's custom. He was the favorite son,
     you know, and I sometimes think that my father may have told him more
     than he ever told me. That is Bartholomew's window up there where the
     moonshine strikes. It is quite bright, but there is no light from
     within, I think."

     "None," said Holmes. "But I see the glint of a light in that little
     window beside the door."

     "Ah, that is the housekeeper's room. That is where old Mrs. Bernstone
     sits. She can tell us all about it. But perhaps you would not mind
     waiting here for a minute or two, for if we all go in together and
     she has no word of our coming she may be alarmed. But hush! what is
     that?"

     He held up the lantern, and his hand shook until the circles of light
     flickered and wavered all round us. Miss Morstan seized my wrist, and
     we all stood with thumping hearts, straining our ears. From the great
     black house there sounded through the silent night the saddest and
     most pitiful of sounds,--the shrill, broken whimpering of a
     frightened woman.

     "It is Mrs. Bernstone," said Sholto. "She is the only woman in the
     house. Wait here. I shall be back in a moment." He hurried for the
     door, and knocked in his peculiar way. We could see a tall old woman
     admit him, and sway with pleasure at the very sight of him.

     "Oh, Mr. Thaddeus, sir, I am so glad you have come! I am so glad you
     have come, Mr. Thaddeus, sir!" We heard her reiterated rejoicings
     until the door was closed and her voice died away into a muffled
     monotone.

     Our guide had left us the lantern. Holmes swung it slowly round, and
     peered keenly at the house, and at the great rubbish-heaps which
     cumbered the grounds. Miss Morstan and I stood together, and her hand
     was in mine. A wondrous subtle thing is love, for here were we two
     who had never seen each other before that day, between whom no word
     or even look of affection had ever passed, and yet now in an hour of
     trouble our hands instinctively sought for each other. I have
     marvelled at it since, but at the time it seemed the most natural
     thing that I should go out to her so, and, as she has often told me,
     there was in her also the instinct to turn to me for comfort and
     protection. So we stood hand in hand, like two children, and there
     was peace in our hearts for all the dark things that surrounded us.

     "What a strange place!" she said, looking round.

     "It looks as though all the moles in England had been let loose in
     it. I have seen something of the sort on the side of a hill near
     Ballarat, where the prospectors had been at work."

     "And from the same cause," said Holmes. "These are the traces of the
     treasure-seekers. You must remember that they were six years looking
     for it. No wonder that the grounds look like a gravel-pit."

     At that moment the door of the house burst open, and Thaddeus Sholto
     came running out, with his hands thrown forward and terror in his
     eyes.

     "There is something amiss with Bartholomew!" he cried. "I am
     frightened! My nerves cannot stand it." He was, indeed, half
     blubbering with fear, and his twitching feeble face peeping out from
     the great Astrakhan collar had the helpless appealing expression of a
     terrified child.

     "Come into the house," said Holmes, in his crisp, firm way.

     "Yes, do!" pleaded Thaddeus Sholto. "I really do not feel equal to
     giving directions."

     We all followed him into the housekeeper's room, which stood upon the
     left-hand side of the passage. The old woman was pacing up and down
     with a scared look and restless picking fingers, but the sight of
     Miss Morstan appeared to have a soothing effect upon her.

     "God bless your sweet calm face!" she cried, with an hysterical sob.
     "It does me good to see you. Oh, but I have been sorely tried this
     day!"

     Our companion patted her thin, work-worn hand, and murmured some few
     words of kindly womanly comfort which brought the color back into the
     others bloodless cheeks.

     "Master has locked himself in and will now answer me," she explained.
     "All day I have waited to hear from him, for he often likes to be
     alone; but an hour ago I feared that something was amiss, so I went
     up and peeped through the key-hole. You must go up, Mr.
     Thaddeus,--you must go up and look for yourself. I have seen Mr.
     Bartholomew Sholto in joy and in sorrow for ten long years, but I
     never saw him with such a face on him as that."

     Sherlock Holmes took the lamp and led the way, for Thaddeus Sholto's
     teeth were chattering in his head. So shaken was he that I had to
     pass my hand under his arm as we went up the stairs, for his knees
     were trembling under him. Twice as we ascended Holmes whipped his
     lens out of his pocket and carefully examined marks which appeared to
     me to be mere shapeless smudges of dust upon the cocoa-nut matting
     which served as a stair-carpet. He walked slowly from step to step,
     holding the lamp, and shooting keen glances to right and left. Miss
     Morstan had remained behind with the frightened housekeeper.

     The third flight of stairs ended in a straight passage of some
     length, with a great picture in Indian tapestry upon the right of it
     and three doors upon the left. Holmes advanced along it in the same
     slow and methodical way, while we kept close at his heels, with our
     long black shadows streaming backwards down the corridor. The third
     door was that which we were seeking. Holmes knocked without receiving
     any answer, and then tried to turn the handle and force it open. It
     was locked on the inside, however, and by a broad and powerful bolt,
     as we could see when we set our lamp up against it. The key being
     turned, however, the hole was not entirely closed. Sherlock Holmes
     bent down to it, and instantly rose again with a sharp intaking of
     the breath.

     "There is something devilish in this, Watson," said he, more moved
     than I had ever before seen him. "What do you make of it?"

     I stooped to the hole, and recoiled in horror. Moonlight was
     streaming into the room, and it was bright with a vague and shifty
     radiance. Looking straight at me, and suspended, as it were, in the
     air, for all beneath was in shadow, there hung a face,--the very face
     of our companion Thaddeus. There was the same high, shining head, the
     same circular bristle of red hair, the same bloodless countenance.
     The features were set, however, in a horrible smile, a fixed and
     unnatural grin, which in that still and moonlit room was more jarring
     to the nerves than any scowl or contortion. So like was the face to
     that of our little friend that I looked round at him to make sure
     that he was indeed with us. Then I recalled to mind that he had
     mentioned to us that his brother and he were twins.

     "This is terrible!" I said to Holmes. "What is to be done?"

     "The door must come down," he answered, and, springing against it, he
     put all his weight upon the lock. It creaked and groaned, but did not
     yield. Together we flung ourselves upon it once more, and this time
     it gave way with a sudden snap, and we found ourselves within
     Bartholomew Sholto's chamber.

     It appeared to have been fitted up as a chemical laboratory. A double
     line of glass-stoppered bottles was drawn up upon the wall opposite
     the door, and the table was littered over with Bunsen burners,
     test-tubes, and retorts. In the corners stood carboys of acid in
     wicker baskets. One of these appeared to leak or to have been broken,
     for a stream of dark-colored liquid had trickled out from it, and the
     air was heavy with a peculiarly pungent, tar-like odor. A set of
     steps stood at one side of the room, in the midst of a litter of lath
     and plaster, and above them there was an opening in the ceiling large
     enough for a man to pass through. At the foot of the steps a long
     coil of rope was thrown carelessly together.

     By the table, in a wooden arm-chair, the master of the house was
     seated all in a heap, with his head sunk upon his left shoulder, and
     that ghastly, inscrutable smile upon his face. He was stiff and cold,
     and had clearly been dead many hours. It seemed to me that not only
     his features but all his limbs were twisted and turned in the most
     fantastic fashion. By his hand upon the table there lay a peculiar
     instrument,--a brown, close-grained stick, with a stone head like a
     hammer, rudely lashed on with coarse twine. Beside it was a torn
     sheet of note-paper with some words scrawled upon it. Holmes glanced
     at it, and then handed it to me.

     "You see," he said, with a significant raising of the eyebrows.

     In the light of the lantern I read, with a thrill of horror, "The
     sign of the four."

     "In God's name, what does it all mean?" I asked.

     "It means murder," said he, stooping over the dead man. "Ah, I
     expected it. Look here!" He pointed to what looked like a long, dark
     thorn stuck in the skin just above the ear.

     "It looks like a thorn," said I.

     "It is a thorn. You may pick it out. But be careful, for it is
     poisoned."

     I took it up between my finger and thumb. It came away from the skin
     so readily that hardly any mark was left behind. One tiny speck of
     blood showed where the puncture had been.

     "This is all an insoluble mystery to me," said I. "It grows darker
     instead of clearer."

     "On the contrary," he answered, "it clears every instant. I only
     require a few missing links to have an entirely connected case."

     We had almost forgotten our companion's presence since we entered the
     chamber. He was still standing in the door-way, the very picture of
     terror, wringing his hands and moaning to himself. Suddenly, however,
     he broke out into a sharp, querulous cry.

     "The treasure is gone!" he said. "They have robbed him of the
     treasure! There is the hole through which we lowered it. I helped him
     to do it! I was the last person who saw him! I left him here last
     night, and I heard him lock the door as I came down-stairs."

     "What time was that?"

     "It was ten o'clock. And now he is dead, and the police will be
     called in, and I shall be suspected of having had a hand in it. Oh,
     yes, I am sure I shall. But you don't think so, gentlemen? Surely you
     don't think that it was I? Is it likely that I would have brought you
     here if it were I? Oh, dear! oh, dear! I know that I shall go mad!"
     He jerked his arms and stamped his feet in a kind of convulsive
     frenzy.

     "You have no reason for fear, Mr. Sholto," said Holmes, kindly,
     putting his hand upon his shoulder. "Take my advice, and drive down
     to the station to report this matter to the police. Offer to assist
     them in every way. We shall wait here until your return."

     The little man obeyed in a half-stupefied fashion, and we heard him
     stumbling down the stairs in the dark.





          CHAPTER VI
          Sherlock Holmes Gives a Demonstration


     "Now, Watson," said Holmes, rubbing his hands, "we have half an hour
     to ourselves. Let us make good use of it. My case is, as I have told
     you, almost complete; but we must not err on the side of
     over-confidence. Simple as the case seems now, there may be something
     deeper underlying it."

     "Simple!" I ejaculated.

     "Surely," said he, with something of the air of a clinical professor
     expounding to his class. "Just sit in the corner there, that your
     footprints may not complicate matters. Now to work! In the first
     place, how did these folk come, and how did they go? The door has not
     been opened since last night. How of the window?" He carried the lamp
     across to it, muttering his observations aloud the while, but
     addressing them to himself rather than to me. "Window is snibbed on
     the inner side. Framework is solid. No hinges at the side. Let us
     open it. No water-pipe near. Roof quite out of reach. Yet a man has
     mounted by the window. It rained a little last night. Here is the
     print of a foot in mould upon the sill. And here is a circular muddy
     mark, and here again upon the floor, and here again by the table. See
     here, Watson! This is really a very pretty demonstration."

     I looked at the round, well-defined muddy discs. "This is not a
     footmark," said I.

     "It is something much more valuable to us. It is the impression of a
     wooden stump. You see here on the sill is the boot-mark, a heavy boot
     with the broad metal heel, and beside it is the mark of the
     timber-toe."

     "It is the wooden-legged man."

     "Quite so. But there has been some one else,--a very able and
     efficient ally. Could you scale that wall, doctor?"

     I looked out of the open window. The moon still shone brightly on
     that angle of the house. We were a good sixty feet from the round,
     and, look where I would, I could see no foothold, nor as much as a
     crevice in the brick-work.

     "It is absolutely impossible," I answered.

     "Without aid it is so. But suppose you had a friend up here who
     lowered you this good stout rope which I see in the corner, securing
     one end of it to this great hook in the wall. Then, I think, if you
     were an active man, you might swarm up, wooden leg and all. You would
     depart, of course, in the same fashion, and your ally would draw up
     the rope, untie it from the hook, shut the window, snib it on the
     inside, and get away in the way that he originally came. As a minor
     point it may be noted," he continued, fingering the rope, "that our
     wooden-legged friend, though a fair climber, was not a professional
     sailor. His hands were far from horny. My lens discloses more than
     one blood-mark, especially towards the end of the rope, from which I
     gather that he slipped down with such velocity that he took the skin
     off his hand."

     "This is all very well," said I, "but the thing becomes more
     unintelligible than ever. How about this mysterious ally? How came he
     into the room?"

     "Yes, the ally!" repeated Holmes, pensively. "There are features of
     interest about this ally. He lifts the case from the regions of the
     commonplace. I fancy that this ally breaks fresh ground in the annals
     of crime in this country,--though parallel cases suggest themselves
     from India, and, if my memory serves me, from Senegambia."

     "How came he, then?" I reiterated. "The door is locked, the window is
     inaccessible. Was it through the chimney?"

     "The grate is much too small," he answered. "I had already considered
     that possibility."

     "How then?" I persisted.

     "You will not apply my precept," he said, shaking his head. "How
     often have I said to you that when you have eliminated the impossible
     whatever remains, however improbable, must be the truth? We know that
     he did not come through the door, the window, or the chimney. We also
     know that he could not have been concealed in the room, as there is
     no concealment possible. Whence, then, did he come?"

     "He came through the hole in the roof," I cried.

     "Of course he did. He must have done so. If you will have the
     kindness to hold the lamp for me, we shall now extend our researches
     to the room above,--the secret room in which the treasure was found."

     He mounted the steps, and, seizing a rafter with either hand, he
     swung himself up into the garret. Then, lying on his face, he reached
     down for the lamp and held it while I followed him.

     The chamber in which we found ourselves was about ten feet one way
     and six the other. The floor was formed by the rafters, with thin
     lath-and-plaster between, so that in walking one had to step from
     beam to beam. The roof ran up to an apex, and was evidently the inner
     shell of the true roof of the house. There was no furniture of any
     sort, and the accumulated dust of years lay thick upon the floor.

     "Here you are, you see," said Sherlock Holmes, putting his hand
     against the sloping wall. "This is a trap-door which leads out on to
     the roof. I can press it back, and here is the roof itself, sloping
     at a gentle angle. This, then, is the way by which Number One
     entered. Let us see if we can find one other traces of his
     individuality."

     He held down the lamp to the floor, and as he did so I saw for the
     second time that night a startled, surprised look come over his face.
     For myself, as I followed his gaze my skin was cold under my clothes.
     The floor was covered thickly with the prints of a naked
     foot,--clear, well defined, perfectly formed, but scarce half the
     size of those of an ordinary man.

     "Holmes," I said, in a whisper, "a child has done the horrid thing."

     He had recovered his self-possession in an instant. "I was staggered
     for the moment," he said, "but the thing is quite natural. My memory
     failed me, or I should have been able to foretell it. There is
     nothing more to be learned here. Let us go down."

     "What is your theory, then, as to those footmarks?" I asked, eagerly,
     when we had regained the lower room once more.

     "My dear Watson, try a little analysis yourself," said he, with a
     touch of impatience. "You know my methods. Apply them, and it will be
     instructive to compare results."

     "I cannot conceive anything which will cover the facts," I answered.

     "It will be clear enough to you soon," he said, in an off-hand way.
     "I think that there is nothing else of importance here, but I will
     look." He whipped out his lens and a tape measure, and hurried about
     the room on his knees, measuring, comparing, examining, with his long
     thin nose only a few inches from the planks, and his beady eyes
     gleaming and deep-set like those of a bird. So swift, silent, and
     furtive were his movements, like those of a trained blood-hound
     picking out a scent, that I could not but think what a terrible
     criminal he would have made had he turned his energy and sagacity
     against the law, instead of exerting them in its defense. As he
     hunted about, he kept muttering to himself, and finally he broke out
     into a loud crow of delight.

     "We are certainly in luck," said he. "We ought to have very little
     trouble now. Number One has had the misfortune to tread in the
     creosote. You can see the outline of the edge of his small foot here
     at the side of this evil-smelling mess. The carboy has been cracked,
     You see, and the stuff has leaked out."

     "What then?" I asked.

     "Why, we have got him, that's all," said he. "I know a dog that would
     follow that scent to the world's end. If a pack can track a trailed
     herring across a shire, how far can a specially-trained hound follow
     so pungent a smell as this? It sounds like a sum in the rule of
     three. The answer should give us the--But halloo! here are the
     accredited representatives of the law."

     Heavy steps and the clamor of loud voices were audible from below,
     and the hall door shut with a loud crash.

     "Before they come," said Holmes, "just put your hand here on this
     poor fellow's arm, and here on his leg. What do you feel?"

     "The muscles are as hard as a board," I answered.

     "Quite so. They are in a state of extreme contraction, far exceeding
     the usual rigor mortis. Coupled with this distortion of the face,
     this Hippocratic smile, or 'risus sardonicus,' as the old writers
     called it, what conclusion would it suggest to your mind?"

     "Death from some powerful vegetable alkaloid," I answered,--"some
     strychnine-like substance which would produce tetanus."

     "That was the idea which occurred to me the instant I saw the drawn
     muscles of the face. On getting into the room I at once looked for
     the means by which the poison had entered the system. As you saw, I
     discovered a thorn which had been driven or shot with no great force
     into the scalp. You observe that the part struck was that which would
     be turned towards the hole in the ceiling if the man were erect in
     his chair. Now examine the thorn."

     I took it up gingerly and held it in the light of the lantern. It was
     long, sharp, and black, with a glazed look near the point as though
     some gummy substance had dried upon it. The blunt end had been
     trimmed and rounded off with a knife.

     "Is that an English thorn?" he asked.

     "No, it certainly is not."

     "With all these data you should be able to draw some just inference.
     But here are the regulars: so the auxiliary forces may beat a
     retreat."

     As he spoke, the steps which had been coming nearer sounded loudly on
     the passage, and a very stout, portly man in a gray suit strode
     heavily into the room. He was red-faced, burly and plethoric, with a
     pair of very small twinkling eyes which looked keenly out from
     between swollen and puffy pouches. He was closely followed by an
     inspector in uniform, and by the still palpitating Thaddeus Sholto.

     "Here's a business!" he cried, in a muffled, husky voice. "Here's a
     pretty business! But who are all these? Why, the house seems to be as
     full as a rabbit-warren!"

     "I think you must recollect me, Mr. Athelney Jones," said Holmes,
     quietly.

     "Why, of course I do!" he wheezed. "It's Mr. Sherlock Holmes, the
     theorist. Remember you! I'll never forget how you lectured us all on
     causes and inferences and effects in the Bishopgate jewel case. It's
     true you set us on the right track; but you'll own now that it was
     more by good luck than good guidance."

     "It was a piece of very simple reasoning."

     "Oh, come, now, come! Never be ashamed to own up. But what is all
     this? Bad business! Bad business! Stern facts here,--no room for
     theories. How lucky that I happened to be out at Norwood over another
     case! I was at the station when the message arrived. What d'you think
     the man died of?"

     "Oh, this is hardly a case for me to theorize over," said Holmes,
     dryly.

     "No, no. Still, we can't deny that you hit the nail on the head
     sometimes. Dear me! Door locked, I understand. Jewels worth half a
     million missing. How was the window?"

     "Fastened; but there are steps on the sill."

     "Well, well, if it was fastened the steps could have nothing to do
     with the matter. That's common sense. Man might have died in a fit;
     but then the jewels are missing. Ha! I have a theory. These flashes
     come upon me at times.--Just step outside, sergeant, and you, Mr.
     Sholto. Your friend can remain.--What do you think of this, Holmes?
     Sholto was, on his own confession, with his brother last night. The
     brother died in a fit, on which Sholto walked off with the treasure.
     How's that?"

     "On which the dead man very considerately got up and locked the door
     on the inside."

     "Hum! There's a flaw there. Let us apply common sense to the matter.
     This Thaddeus Sholto was with his brother; there was a quarrel; so
     much we know. The brother is dead and the jewels are gone. So much
     also we know. No one saw the brother from the time Thaddeus left him.
     His bed had not been slept in. Thaddeus is evidently in a most
     disturbed state of mind. His appearance is--well, not attractive. You
     see that I am weaving my web round Thaddeus. The net begins to close
     upon him."

     "You are not quite in possession of the facts yet," said Holmes.
     "This splinter of wood, which I have every reason to believe to be
     poisoned, was in the man's scalp where you still see the mark; this
     card, inscribed as you see it, was on the table; and beside it lay
     this rather curious stone-headed instrument. How does all that fit
     into your theory?"

     "Confirms it in every respect," said the fat detective, pompously.
     "House is full of Indian curiosities. Thaddeus brought this up, and
     if this splinter be poisonous Thaddeus may as well have made
     murderous use of it as any other man. The card is some
     hocus-pocus,--a blind, as like as not. The only question is, how did
     he depart? Ah, of course, here is a hole in the roof." With great
     activity, considering his bulk, he sprang up the steps and squeezed
     through into the garret, and immediately afterwards we heard his
     exulting voice proclaiming that he had found the trap-door.

     "He can find something," remarked Holmes, shrugging his shoulders.
     "He has occasional glimmerings of reason. Il n'y a pas des sots si
     incommodes que ceux qui ont de l'esprit!"

     "You see!" said Athelney Jones, reappearing down the steps again.
     "Facts are better than mere theories, after all. My view of the case
     is confirmed. There is a trap-door communicating with the roof, and
     it is partly open."

     "It was I who opened it."

     "Oh, indeed! You did notice it, then?" He seemed a little crestfallen
     at the discovery. "Well, whoever noticed it, it shows how our
     gentleman got away. Inspector!"

     "Yes, sir," from the passage.

     "Ask Mr. Sholto to step this way.--Mr. Sholto, it is my duty to
     inform you that anything which you may say will be used against you.
     I arrest you in the queen's name as being concerned in the death of
     your brother."

     "There, now! Didn't I tell you!" cried the poor little man, throwing
     out his hands, and looking from one to the other of us.

     "Don't trouble yourself about it, Mr. Sholto," said Holmes. "I think
     that I can engage to clear you of the charge."

     "Don't promise too much, Mr. Theorist,--don't promise too much!"
     snapped the detective. "You may find it a harder matter than you
     think."

     "Not only will I clear him, Mr. Jones, but I will make you a free
     present of the name and description of one of the two people who were
     in this room last night. His name, I have every reason to believe, is
     Jonathan Small. He is a poorly-educated man, small, active, with his
     right leg off, and wearing a wooden stump which is worn away upon the
     inner side. His left boot has a coarse, square-toed sole, with an
     iron band round the heel. He is a middle-aged man, much sunburned,
     and has been a convict. These few indications may be of some
     assistance to you, coupled with the fact that there is a good deal of
     skin missing from the palm of his hand. The other man--"

     "Ah! the other man--?" asked Athelney Jones, in a sneering voice, but
     impressed none the less, as I could easily see, by the precision of
     the other's manner.

     "Is a rather curious person," said Sherlock Holmes, turning upon his
     heel. "I hope before very long to be able to introduce you to the
     pair of them. A word with you, Watson."

     He led me out to the head of the stair. "This unexpected occurrence,"
     he said, "has caused us rather to lose sight of the original purpose
     of our journey."

     "I have just been thinking so," I answered. "It is not right that
     Miss Morstan should remain in this stricken house."

     "No. You must escort her home. She lives with Mrs. Cecil Forrester,
     in Lower Camberwell: so it is not very far. I will wait for you here
     if you will drive out again. Or perhaps you are too tired?"

     "By no means. I don't think I could rest until I know more of this
     fantastic business. I have seen something of the rough side of life,
     but I give you my word that this quick succession of strange
     surprises to-night has shaken my nerve completely. I should like,
     however, to see the matter through with you, now that I have got so
     far."

     "Your presence will be of great service to me," he answered. "We
     shall work the case out independently, and leave this fellow Jones to
     exult over any mare's-nest which he may choose to construct. When you
     have dropped Miss Morstan I wish you to go on to No. 3 Pinchin Lane,
     down near the water's edge at Lambeth. The third house on the
     right-hand side is a bird-stuffer's: Sherman is the name. You will
     see a weasel holding a young rabbit in the window. Knock old Sherman
     up, and tell him, with my compliments, that I want Toby at once. You
     will bring Toby back in the cab with you."

     "A dog, I suppose."

     "Yes,--a queer mongrel, with a most amazing power of scent. I would
     rather have Toby's help than that of the whole detective force of
     London."

     "I shall bring him, then," said I. "It is one now. I ought to be back
     before three, if I can get a fresh horse."

     "And I," said Holmes, "shall see what I can learn from Mrs.
     Bernstone, and from the Indian servant, who, Mr. Thaddeus tell me,
     sleeps in the next garret. Then I shall study the great Jones's
     methods and listen to his not too delicate sarcasms. 'Wir sind
     gewohnt, da?die Menschen verhhnen was sie nicht verstehen.' Goethe
     is always pithy."





          CHAPTER VII
          The Episode of the Barrel


     The police had brought a cab with them, and in this I escorted Miss
     Morstan back to her home. After the angelic fashion of women, she had
     borne trouble with a calm face as long as there was some one weaker
     than herself to support, and I had found her bright and placid by the
     side of the frightened housekeeper. In the cab, however, she first
     turned faint, and then burst into a passion of weeping,--so sorely
     had she been tried by the adventures of the night. She has told me
     since that she thought me cold and distant upon that journey. She
     little guessed the struggle within my breast, or the effort of
     self-restraint which held me back. My sympathies and my love went out
     to her, even as my hand had in the garden. I felt that years of the
     conventionalities of life could not teach me to know her sweet, brave
     nature as had this one day of strange experiences. Yet there were two
     thoughts which sealed the words of affection upon my lips. She was
     weak and helpless, shaken in mind and nerve. It was to take her at a
     disadvantage to obtrude love upon her at such a time. Worse still,
     she was rich. If Holmes's researches were successful, she would be an
     heiress. Was it fair, was it honorable, that a half-pay surgeon
     should take such advantage of an intimacy which chance had brought
     about? Might she not look upon me as a mere vulgar fortune-seeker? I
     could not bear to risk that such a thought should cross her mind.
     This Agra treasure intervened like an impassable barrier between us.

     It was nearly two o'clock when we reached Mrs. Cecil Forrester's. The
     servants had retired hours ago, but Mrs. Forrester had been so
     interested by the strange message which Miss Morstan had received
     that she had sat up in the hope of her return. She opened the door
     herself, a middle-aged, graceful woman, and it gave me joy to see how
     tenderly her arm stole round the other's waist and how motherly was
     the voice in which she greeted her. She was clearly no mere paid
     dependant, but an honored friend. I was introduced, and Mrs.
     Forrester earnestly begged me to step in and tell her our adventures.
     I explained, however, the importance of my errand, and promised
     faithfully to call and report any progress which we might make with
     the case. As we drove away I stole a glance back, and I still seem to
     see that little group on the step, the two graceful, clinging
     figures, the half-opened door, the hall light shining through stained
     glass, the barometer, and the bright stair-rods. It was soothing to
     catch even that passing glimpse of a tranquil English home in the
     midst of the wild, dark business which had absorbed us.

     And the more I thought of what had happened, the wilder and darker it
     grew. I reviewed the whole extraordinary sequence of events as I
     rattled on through the silent gas-lit streets. There was the original
     problem: that at least was pretty clear now. The death of Captain
     Morstan, the sending of the pearls, the advertisement, the
     letter,--we had had light upon all those events. They had only led
     us, however, to a deeper and far more tragic mystery. The Indian
     treasure, the curious plan found among Morstan's baggage, the strange
     scene at Major Sholto's death, the rediscovery of the treasure
     immediately followed by the murder of the discoverer, the very
     singular accompaniments to the crime, the footsteps, the remarkable
     weapons, the words upon the card, corresponding with those upon
     Captain Morstan's chart,--here was indeed a labyrinth in which a man
     less singularly endowed than my fellow-lodger might well despair of
     ever finding the clue.

     Pinchin Lane was a row of shabby two-storied brick houses in the
     lower quarter of Lambeth. I had to knock for some time at No. 3
     before I could make my impression. At last, however, there was the
     glint of a candle behind the blind, and a face looked out at the
     upper window.

     "Go on, you drunken vagabone," said the face. "If you kick up any
     more row I'll open the kennels and let out forty-three dogs upon
     you."

     "If you'll let one out it's just what I have come for," said I.

     "Go on!" yelled the voice. "So help me gracious, I have a wiper in
     the bag, an' I'll drop it on your 'ead if you don't hook it."

     "But I want a dog," I cried.

     "I won't be argued with!" shouted Mr. Sherman. "Now stand clear, for
     when I say 'three,' down goes the wiper."

     "Mr. Sherlock Holmes--" I began, but the words had a most magical
     effect, for the window instantly slammed down, and within a minute
     the door was unbarred and open. Mr. Sherman was a lanky, lean old
     man, with stooping shoulders, a stringy neck, and blue-tinted
     glasses.

     "A friend of Mr. Sherlock is always welcome," said he.  "Step in,
     sir. Keep clear of the badger; for he bites. Ah, naughty, naughty,
     would you take a nip at the gentleman?" This to a stoat which thrust
     its wicked head and red eyes between the bars of its cage. "Don't
     mind that, sir: it's only a slow-worm. It hain't got no fangs, so I
     gives it the run o' the room, for it keeps the bettles down. You must
     not mind my bein' just a little short wi' you at first, for I'm guyed
     at by the children, and there's many a one just comes down this lane
     to knock me up. What was it that Mr. Sherlock Holmes wanted, sir?"

     "He wanted a dog of yours."

     "Ah! that would be Toby."

     "Yes, Toby was the name."

     "Toby lives at No. 7 on the left here." He moved slowly forward with
     his candle among the queer animal family which he had gathered round
     him. In the uncertain, shadowy light I could see dimly that there
     were glancing, glimmering eyes peeping down at us from every cranny
     and corner. Even the rafters above our heads were lined by solemn
     fowls, who lazily shifted their weight from one leg to the other as
     our voices disturbed their slumbers.

     Toby proved to an ugly, long-haired, lop-eared creature, half spaniel
     and half lurcher, brown-and-white in color, with a very clumsy
     waddling gait. It accepted after some hesitation a lump of sugar
     which the old naturalist handed to me, and, having thus sealed an
     alliance, it followed me to the cab, and made no difficulties about
     accompanying me. It had just struck three on the Palace clock when I
     found myself back once more at Pondicherry Lodge. The
     ex-prize-fighter McMurdo had, I found, been arrested as an accessory,
     and both he and Mr. Sholto had been marched off to the station. Two
     constables guarded the narrow gate, but they allowed me to pass with
     the dog on my mentioning the detective's name.

     Holmes was standing on the door-step, with his hands in his pockets,
     smoking his pipe.

     "Ah, you have him there!" said he. "Good dog, then! Athelney Jones
     has gone. We have had an immense display of energy since you left. He
     has arrested not only friend Thaddeus, but the gatekeeper, the
     housekeeper, and the Indian servant. We have the place to ourselves,
     but for a sergeant up-stairs. Leave the dog here, and come up."

     We tied Toby to the hall table, and reascended the stairs. The room
     was as he had left it, save that a sheet had been draped over the
     central figure. A weary-looking police-sergeant reclined in the
     corner.

     "Lend me your bull's-eye, sergeant," said my companion. "Now tie this
     bit of card round my neck, so as to hang it in front of me. Thank
     you. Now I must kick off my boots and stockings.--Just you carry them
     down with you, Watson. I am going to do a little climbing. And dip my
     handkerchief into the creasote. That will do. Now come up into the
     garret with me for a moment."

     We clambered up through the hole. Holmes turned his light once more
     upon the footsteps in the dust.

     "I wish you particularly to notice these footmarks," he said. "Do you
     observe anything noteworthy about them?"

     "They belong," I said, "to a child or a small woman."

     "Apart from their size, though. Is there nothing else?"

     "They appear to be much as other footmarks."

     "Not at all. Look here! This is the print of a right foot in the
     dust. Now I make one with my naked foot beside it. What is the chief
     difference?"

     "Your toes are all cramped together. The other print has each toe
     distinctly divided."

     "Quite so. That is the point. Bear that in mind. Now, would you
     kindly step over to that flap-window and smell the edge of the
     wood-work? I shall stay here, as I have this handkerchief in my
     hand."

     I did as he directed, and was instantly conscious of a strong tarry
     smell.

     "That is where he put his foot in getting out. If you can trace him,
     I should think that Toby will have no difficulty. Now run
     down-stairs, loose the dog, and look out for Blondin."

     By the time that I got out into the grounds Sherlock Holmes was on
     the roof, and I could see him like an enormous glow-worm crawling
     very slowly along the ridge. I lost sight of him behind a stack of
     chimneys, but he presently reappeared, and then vanished once more
     upon the opposite side. When I made my way round there I found him
     seated at one of the corner eaves.

     "That You, Watson?" he cried.

     "Yes."

     "This is the place. What is that black thing down there?"

     "A water-barrel."

     "Top on it?"

     "Yes."

     "No sign of a ladder?"

     "No."

     "Confound the fellow! It's a most break-neck place. I ought to be
     able to come down where he could climb up. The water-pipe feels
     pretty firm. Here goes, anyhow."

     There was a scuffling of feet, and the lantern began to come steadily
     down the side of the wall. Then with a light spring he came on to the
     barrel, and from there to the earth.

     "It was easy to follow him," he said, drawing on his stockings and
     boots. "Tiles were loosened the whole way along, and in his hurry he
     had dropped this. It confirms my diagnosis, as you doctors express
     it."

     The object which he held up to me was a small pocket or pouch woven
     out of colored grasses and with a few tawdry beads strung round it.
     In shape and size it was not unlike a cigarette-case. Inside were
     half a dozen spines of dark wood, sharp at one end and rounded at the
     other, like that which had struck Bartholomew Sholto.

     "They are hellish things," said he. "Look out that you don't prick
     yourself. I'm delighted to have them, for the chances are that they
     are all he has. There is the less fear of you or me finding one in
     our skin before long. I would sooner face a Martini bullet, myself.
     Are you game for a six-mile trudge, Watson?"

     "Certainly," I answered.

     "Your leg will stand it?"

     "Oh, yes."

     "Here you are, doggy! Good old Toby! Smell it, Toby, smell it!" He
     pushed the creasote handkerchief under the dog's nose, while the
     creature stood with its fluffy legs separated, and with a most
     comical cock to its head, like a connoisseur sniffing the bouquet of
     a famous vintage. Holmes then threw the handkerchief to a distance,
     fastened a stout cord to the mongrel's collar, and let him to the
     foot of the water-barrel. The creature instantly broke into a
     succession of high, tremulous yelps, and, with his nose on the
     ground, and his tail in the air, pattered off upon the trail at a
     pace which strained his leash and kept us at the top of our speed.

     The east had been gradually whitening, and we could now see some
     distance in the cold gray light. The square, massive house, with its
     black, empty windows and high, bare walls, towered up, sad and
     forlorn, behind us. Our course let right across the grounds, in and
     out among the trenches and pits with which they were scarred and
     intersected. The whole place, with its scattered dirt-heaps and
     ill-grown shrubs, had a blighted, ill-omened look which harmonized
     with the black tragedy which hung over it.

     On reaching the boundary wall Toby ran along, whining eagerly,
     underneath its shadow, and stopped finally in a corner screened by a
     young beech. Where the two walls joined, several bricks had been
     loosened, and the crevices left were worn down and rounded upon the
     lower side, as though they had frequently been used as a ladder.
     Holmes clambered up, and, taking the dog from me, he dropped it over
     upon the other side.

     "There's the print of wooden-leg's hand," he remarked, as I mounted
     up beside him. "You see the slight smudge of blood upon the white
     plaster. What a lucky thing it is that we have had no very heavy rain
     since yesterday! The scent will lie upon the road in spite of their
     eight-and-twenty hours' start."

     I confess that I had my doubts myself when I reflected upon the great
     traffic which had passed along the London road in the interval. My
     fears were soon appeased, however. Toby never hesitated or swerved,
     but waddled on in his peculiar rolling fashion. Clearly, the pungent
     smell of the creasote rose high above all other contending scents.

     "Do not imagine," said Holmes, "that I depend for my success in this
     case upon the mere chance of one of these fellows having put his foot
     in the chemical. I have knowledge now which would enable me to trace
     them in many different ways. This, however, is the readiest and,
     since fortune has put it into our hands, I should be culpable if I
     neglected it. It has, however, prevented the case from becoming the
     pretty little intellectual problem which it at one time promised to
     be. There might have been some credit to be gained out of it, but for
     this too palpable clue."

     "There is credit, and to spare," said I. "I assure you, Holmes, that
     I marvel at the means by which you obtain your results in this case,
     even more than I did in the Jefferson Hope Murder. The thing seems to
     me to be deeper and more inexplicable. How, for example, could you
     describe with such confidence the wooden-legged man?"

     "Pshaw, my dear boy! it was simplicity itself. I don't wish to be
     theatrical. It is all patent and above-board. Two officers who are in
     command of a convict-guard learn an important secret as to buried
     treasure. A map is drawn for them by an Englishman named Jonathan
     Small. You remember that we saw the name upon the chart in Captain
     Morstan's possession. He had signed it in behalf of himself and his
     associates,--the sign of the four, as he somewhat dramatically called
     it. Aided by this chart, the officers--or one of them--gets the
     treasure and brings it to England, leaving, we will suppose, some
     condition under which he received it unfulfilled. Now, then, why did
     not Jonathan Small get the treasure himself? The answer is obvious.
     The chart is dated at a time when Morstan was brought into close
     association with convicts. Jonathan Small did not get the treasure
     because he and his associates were themselves convicts and could not
     get away."

     "But that is mere speculation," said I.

     "It is more than that. It is the only hypothesis which covers the
     facts. Let us see how it fits in with the sequel. Major Sholto
     remains at peace for some years, happy in the possession of his
     treasure. Then he receives a letter from India which gives him a
     great fright. What was that?"

     "A letter to say that the men whom he had wronged had been set free."

     "Or had escaped. That is much more likely, for he would have known
     what their term of imprisonment was. It would not have been a
     surprise to him. What does he do then? He guards himself against a
     wooden-legged man,--a white man, mark you, for he mistakes a white
     tradesman for him, and actually fires a pistol at him. Now, only one
     white man's name is on the chart. The others are Hindoos or
     Mohammedans. There is no other white man. Therefore we may say with
     confidence that the wooden-legged man is identical with Jonathan
     Small. Does the reasoning strike yo as being faulty?"

     "No: it is clear and concise."

     "Well, now, let us put ourselves in the place of Jonathan Small. Let
     us look at it from his point of view. He comes to England with the
     double idea of regaining what he would consider to be his rights and
     of having his revenge upon the man who had wronged him. He found out
     where Sholto lived, and very possibly he established communications
     with some one inside the house. There is this butler, Lal Rao, whom
     we have not seen. Mrs. Bernstone gives him far from a good character.
     Small could not find out, however, where the treasure was hid, for no
     one ever knew, save the major and one faithful servant who had died.
     Suddenly Small learns that the major is on his death-bed. In a frenzy
     lest the secret of the treasure die with him, he runs the gauntlet of
     the guards, makes his way to the dying man's window, and is only
     deterred from entering by the presence of his two sons. Mad with
     hate, however, against the dead man, he enters the room that night,
     searches his private papers in the hope of discovering some
     memorandum relating to the treasure, and finally leaves a momento of
     his visit in the short inscription upon the card. He had doubtless
     planned beforehand that should he slay the major he would leave some
     such record upon the body as a sign that it was not a common murder,
     but, from the point of view of the four associates, something in the
     nature of an act of justice. Whimsical and bizarre conceits of this
     kind are common enough in the annals of crime, and usually afford
     valuable indications as to the criminal. Do you follow all this?"

     "Very clearly."

     "Now, what could Jonathan Small do? He could only continue to keep a
     secret watch upon the efforts made to find the treasure. Possibly he
     leaves England and only comes back at intervals. Then comes the
     discovery of the garret, and he is instantly informed of it. We again
     trace the presence of some confederate in the household. Jonathan,
     with his wooden leg, is utterly unable to reach the lofty room of
     Bartholomew Sholto. He takes with him, however, a rather curious
     associate, who gets over this difficulty, but dips his naked foot
     into creasote, whence come Toby, and a six-mile limp for a half-pay
     officer with a damaged tendo Achillis."

     "But it was the associate, and not Jonathan, who committed the
     crime."

     "Quite so. And rather to Jonathan's disgust, to judge by the way the
     stamped about when he got into the room. He bore no grudge against
     Bartholomew Sholto, and would have preferred if he could have been
     simply bound and gagged. He did not wish to put his head in a halter.
     There was no help for it, however: the savage instincts of his
     companion had broken out, and the poison had done its work: so
     Jonathan Small left his record, lowered the treasure-box to the
     ground, and followed it himself. That was the train of events as far
     as I can decipher them. Of course as to his personal appearance he
     must be middle-aged, and must be sunburned after serving his time in
     such an oven as the Andamans. His height is readily calculated from
     the length of his stride, and we know that he was bearded. His
     hairiness was the one point which impressed itself upon Thaddeus
     Sholto when he saw him at the window. I don't know that there is
     anything else."

     "The associate?"

     "Ah, well, there is no great mystery in that. But you will know all
     about it soon enough. How sweet the morning air is! See how that one
     little cloud floats like a pink feather from some gigantic flamingo.
     Now the red rim of the sun pushes itself over the London cloud-bank.
     It shines on a good many folk, but on none, I dare bet, who are on a
     stranger errand than you and I. How small we feel with our petty
     ambitions and strivings in the presence of the great elemental forces
     of nature! Are you well up in your Jean Paul?"

     "Fairly so. I worked back to him through Carlyle."

     "That was like following the brook to the parent lake. He makes one
     curious but profound remark. It is that the chief proof of man's real
     greatness lies in his perception of his own smallness. It argues, you
     see, a power of comparison and of appreciation which is in itself a
     proof of nobility. There is much food for thought in Richter. You
     have not a pistol, have you?"

     "I have my stick."

     "It is just possible that we may need something of the sort if we get
     to their lair. Jonathan I shall leave to you, but if the other turns
     nasty I shall shoot him dead." He took out his revolver as he spoke,
     and, having loaded two of the chambers, he put it back into the
     right-hand pocket of his jacket.

     We had during this time been following the guidance of Toby down the
     half-rural villa-lined roads which lead to the metropolis. Now,
     however, we were beginning to come among continuous streets, where
     laborers and dockmen were already astir, and slatternly women were
     taking down shutters and brushing door-steps. At the square-topped
     corner public houses business was just beginning, and rough-looking
     men were emerging, rubbing their sleeves across their beards after
     their morning wet. Strange dogs sauntered up and stared wonderingly
     at us as we passed, but our inimitable Toby looked neither to the
     right nor to the left, but trotted onwards with his nose to the
     ground and an occasional eager whine which spoke of a hot scent.

     We had traversed Streatham, Brixton, Camberwell, and now found
     ourselves in Kennington Lane, having borne away through the
     side-streets to the east of the Oval. The men whom we pursued seemed
     to have taken a curiously zigzag road, with the idea probably of
     escaping observation. They had never kept to the main road if a
     parallel side-street would serve their turn. At the foot of
     Kennington Lane they had edged away to the left through Bond Street
     and Miles Street. Where the latter street turns into Knight's Place,
     Toby ceased to advance, but began to run backwards and forwards with
     one ear cocked and the other drooping, the very picture of canine
     indecision. Then he waddled round in circles, looking up to us from
     time to time, as if to ask for sympathy in his embarrassment.

     "What the deuce is the matter with the dog?" growled Holmes. "They
     surely would not take a cab, or go off in a balloon."

     "Perhaps they stood here for some time," I suggested.

     "Ah! it's all right. He's off again," said my companion, in a tone of
     relief.

     He was indeed off, for after sniffing round again he suddenly made up
     his mind, and darted away with an energy and determination such as he
     had not yet shown. The scent appeared to be much hotter than before,
     for he had not even to put his nose on the ground, but tugged at his
     leash and tried to break into a run. I cold see by the gleam in
     Holmes's eyes that he thought we were nearing the end of our journey.

     Our course now ran down Nine Elms until we came to Broderick and
     Nelson's large timber-yard, just past the White Eagle tavern. Here
     the dog, frantic with excitement, turned down through the side-gate
     into the enclosure, where the sawyers were already at work. On the
     dog raced through sawdust and shavings, down an alley, round a
     passage, between two wood-piles, and finally, with a triumphant yelp,
     sprang upon a large barrel which still stood upon the hand-trolley on
     which it had been brought. With lolling tongue and blinking eyes,
     Toby stood upon the cask, looking from one to the other of us for
     some sign of appreciation. The staves of the barrel and the wheels of
     the trolley were smeared with a dark liquid, and the whole air was
     heavy with the smell of creasote.

     Sherlock Holmes and I looked blankly at each other, and then burst
     simultaneously into an uncontrollable fit of laughter.





          CHAPTER VIII
          The Baker Street Irregulars


     "What now?" I asked. "Toby has lost his character for infallibility."

     "He acted according to his lights," said Holmes, lifting him down
     from the barrel and walking him out of the timber-yard. "If you
     consider how much creasote is carted about London in one day, it is
     no great wonder that our trail should have been crossed. It is much
     used now, especially for the seasoning of wood. Poor Toby is not to
     blame."

     "We must get on the main scent again, I suppose."

     "Yes. And, fortunately, we have no distance to go. Evidently what
     puzzled the dog at the corner of Knight's Place was that there were
     two different trails running in opposite directions. We took the
     wrong one. It only remains to follow the other."

     There was no difficulty about this. On leading Toby to the place
     where he had committed his fault, he cast about in a wide circle and
     finally dashed off in a fresh direction.

     "We must take care that he does not now bring us to the place where
     the creasote-barrel came from," I observed.

     "I had thought of that. But you notice that he keeps on the pavement,
     whereas the barrel passed down the roadway. No, we are on the true
     scent now."

     It tended down towards the river-side, running through Belmont Place
     and Prince's Street. At the end of Broad Street it ran right down to
     the water's edge, where there was a small wooden wharf. Toby led us
     to the very edge of this, and there stood whining, looking out on the
     dark current beyond.

     "We are out of luck," said Holmes. "They have taken to a boat here."
     Several small punts and skiffs were lying about in the water and on
     the edge of the wharf. We took Toby round to each in turn, but,
     though he sniffed earnestly, he made no sign.

     Close to the rude landing-stage was a small brick house, with a
     wooden placard slung out through the second window. "Mordecai Smith"
     was printed across it in large letters, and, underneath, "Boats to
     hire by the hour or day." A second inscription above the door
     informed us that a steam launch was kept,--a statement which was
     confirmed by a great pile of coke upon the jetty. Sherlock Holmes
     looked slowly round, and his face assumed an ominous expression.

     "This looks bad," said he. "These fellows are sharper than I
     expected. They seem to have covered their tracks. There has, I fear,
     been preconcerted management here."

     He was approaching the door of the house, when it opened, and a
     little, curly-headed lad of six came running out, followed by a
     stoutish, red-faced woman with a large sponge in her hand.

     "You come back and be washed, Jack," she shouted. "Come back, you
     young imp; for if your father comes home and finds you like that,
     he'll let us hear of it."

     "Dear little chap!" said Holmes, strategically. "What a rosy-cheeked
     young rascal! Now, Jack, is there anything you would like?"

     The youth pondered for a moment. "I'd like a shillin'," said he.

     "Nothing you would like better?"

     "I'd like two shillin' better," the prodigy answered, after some
     thought.

     "Here you are, then! Catch!--A fine child, Mrs. Smith!"

     "Lor' bless you, sir, he is that, and forward. He gets a'most too
     much for me to manage, 'specially when my man is away days at a
     time."

     "Away, is he?" said Holmes, in a disappointed voice. "I am sorry for
     that, for I wanted to speak to Mr. Smith."

     "He's been away since yesterday mornin', sir, and, truth to tell, I
     am beginnin' to feel frightened about him. But if it was about a
     boat, sir, maybe I could serve as well."

     "I wanted to hire his steam launch."

     "Why, bless you, sir, it is in the steam launch that he has gone.
     That's what puzzles me; for I know there ain't more coals in her than
     would take her to about Woolwich and back. If he'd been away in the
     barge I'd ha' thought nothin'; for many a time a job has taken him as
     far as Gravesend, and then if there was much doin' there he might ha'
     stayed over. But what good is a steam launch without coals?"

     "He might have bought some at a wharf down the river."

     "He might, sir, but it weren't his way. Many a time I've heard him
     call out at the prices they charge for a few odd bags. Besides, I
     don't like that wooden-legged man, wi' his ugly face and outlandish
     talk. What did he want always knockin' about here for?"

     "A wooden-legged man?" said Holmes, with bland surprise.

     "Yes, sir, a brown, monkey-faced chap that's called more'n once for
     my old man. It was him that roused him up yesternight, and, what's
     more, my man knew he was comin', for he had steam up in the launch. I
     tell you straight, sir, I don't feel easy in my mind about it."

     "But, my dear Mrs. Smith," said Holmes, shrugging his shoulders, "You
     are frightening yourself about nothing. How could you possibly tell
     that it was the wooden-legged man who came in the night? I don't
     quite understand how you can be so sure."

     "His voice, sir. I knew his voice, which is kind o' thick and foggy.
     He tapped at the winder,--about three it would be. 'Show a leg,
     matey,' says he: 'time to turn out guard.' My old man woke up
     Jim,--that's my eldest,--and away they went, without so much as a
     word to me. I could hear the wooden leg clackin' on the stones."

     "And was this wooden-legged man alone?"

     "Couldn't say, I am sure, sir. I didn't hear no one else."

     "I am sorry, Mrs. Smith, for I wanted a steam launch, and I have
     heard good reports of the--Let me see, what is her name?"

     "The Aurora, sir."

     "Ah! She's not that old green launch with a yellow line, very broad
     in the beam?"

     "No, indeed. She's as trim a little thing as any on the river. She's
     been fresh painted, black with two red streaks."

     "Thanks. I hope that you will hear soon from Mr. Smith. I am going
     down the river; and if I should see anything of the Aurora I shall
     let him know that you are uneasy. A black funnel, you say?"

     "No, sir. Black with a white band."

     "Ah, of course. It was the sides which were black. Good-morning, Mrs.
     Smith.--There is a boatman here with a wherry, Watson. We shall take
     it and cross the river.

     "The main thing with people of that sort," said Holmes, as we sat in
     the sheets of the wherry, "is never to let them think that their
     information can be of the slightest importance to you. If you do,
     they will instantly shut up like an oyster. If you listen to them
     under protest, as it were, you are very likely to get what you want."

     "Our course now seems pretty clear," said I.

     "What would you do, then?"

     "I would engage a launch and go down the river on the track of the
     Aurora."

     "My dear fellow, it would be a colossal task. She may have touched at
     any wharf on either side of the stream between here and Greenwich.
     Below the bridge there is a perfect labyrinth of landing-places for
     miles. It would take you days and days to exhaust them, if you set
     about it alone."

     "Employ the police, then."

     "No. I shall probably call Athelney Jones in at the last moment. He
     is not a bad fellow, and I should not like to do anything which would
     injure him professionally. But I have a fancy for working it out
     myself, now that we have gone so far."

     "Could we advertise, then, asking for information from wharfingers?"

     "Worse and worse! Our men would know that the chase was hot at their
     heels, and they would be off out of the country. As it is, they are
     likely enough to leave, but as long as they think they are perfectly
     safe they will be in no hurry. Jones's energy will be of use to us
     there, for his view of the case is sure to push itself into the daily
     press, and the runaways will think that every one is off on the wrong
     scent."

     "What are we to do, then?" I asked, as we landed near Millbank
     Penitentiary.

     "Take this hansom, drive home, have some breakfast, and get an hour's
     sleep. It is quite on the cards that we may be afoot to-night again.
     Stop at a telegraph-office, cabby! We will keep Toby, for he may be
     of use to us yet."

     We pulled up at the Great Peter Street post-office, and Holmes
     despatched his wire. "Whom do you think that is to?" he asked, as we
     resumed our journey.

     "I am sure I don't know."

     "You remember the Baker Street division of the detective police force
     whom I employed in the Jefferson Hope case?"

     "Well," said I, laughing.

     "This is just the case where they might be invaluable. If they fail,
     I have other resources; but I shall try them first. That wire was to
     my dirty little lieutenant, Wiggins, and I expect that he and his
     gang will be with us before we have finished our breakfast."

     It was between eight and nine o'clock now, and I was conscious of a
     strong reaction after the successive excitements of the night. I was
     limp and weary, befogged in mind and fatigued in body. I had not the
     professional enthusiasm which carried my companion on, nor could I
     look at the matter as a mere abstract intellectual problem. As far as
     the death of Bartholomew Sholto went, I had heard little good of him,
     and could feel no intense antipathy to his murderers. The treasure,
     however, was a different matter. That, or part of it, belonged
     rightfully to Miss Morstan. While there was a chance of recovering it
     I was ready to devote my life to the one object. True, if I found it
     it would probably put her forever beyond my reach. Yet it would be a
     petty and selfish love which would be influenced by such a thought as
     that. If Holmes could work to find the criminals, I had a tenfold
     stronger reason to urge me on to find the treasure.

     A bath at Baker Street and a complete change freshened me up
     wonderfully. When I came down to our room I found the breakfast laid
     and Holmes pouring out the coffee.

     "Here it is," said he, laughing, and pointing to an open newspaper.
     "The energetic Jones and the ubiquitous reporter have fixed it up
     between them. But you have had enough of the case. Better have your
     ham and eggs first."

     I took the paper from him and read the short notice, which was headed
     "Mysterious Business at Upper Norwood."

     "About twelve o'clock last night," said the Standard, "Mr.
     Bartholomew Sholto, of Pondicherry Lodge, Upper Norwood, was found
     dead in his room under circumstances which point to foul play. As far
     as we can learn, no actual traces of violence were found upon Mr.
     Sholto's person, but a valuable collection of Indian gems which the
     deceased gentleman had inherited from his father has been carried
     off. The discovery was first made by Mr. Sherlock Holmes and Dr.
     Watson, who had called at the house with Mr. Thaddeus Sholto, brother
     of the deceased. By a singular piece of good fortune, Mr. Athelney
     Jones, the well-known member of the detective police force, happened
     to be at the Norwood Police Station, and was on the ground within
     half an hour of the first alarm. His trained and experienced
     faculties were at once directed towards the detection of the
     criminals, with the gratifying result that the brother, Thaddeus
     Sholto, has already been arrested, together with the housekeeper,
     Mrs. Bernstone, an Indian butler named Lal Rao, and a porter, or
     gatekeeper, named McMurdo. It is quite certain that the thief or
     thieves were well acquainted with the house, for Mr. Jones's
     well-known technical knowledge and his powers of minute observation
     have enabled him to prove conclusively that the miscreants could not
     have entered by the door or by the window, but must have made their
     way across the roof of the building, and so through a trap-door into
     a room which communicated with that in which the body was found. This
     fact, which has been very clearly made out, proves conclusively that
     it was no mere haphazard burglary. The prompt and energetic action of
     the officers of the law shows the great advantage of the presence on
     such occasions of a single vigorous and masterful mind. We cannot but
     think that it supplies an argument to those who would wish to see our
     detectives more decentralized, and so brought into closer and more
     effective touch with the cases which it is their duty to
     investigate."

     "Isn't it gorgeous!" said Holmes, grinning over his coffee-cup. "What
     do you think of it?"

     "I think that we have had a close shave ourselves of being arrested
     for the crime."

     "So do I. I wouldn't answer for our safety now, if he should happen
     to have another of his attacks of energy."

     At this moment there was a loud ring at the bell, and I could hear
     Mrs. Hudson, our landlady, raising her voice in a wail of
     expostulation and dismay.

     "By heaven, Holmes," I said, half rising, "I believe that they are
     really after us."

     "No, it's not quite so bad as that. It is the unofficial force,--the
     Baker Street irregulars."

     As he spoke, there came a swift pattering of naked feet upon the
     stairs, a clatter of high voices, and in rushed a dozen dirty and
     ragged little street-Arabs. There was some show of discipline among
     them, despite their tumultuous entry, for they instantly drew up in
     line and stood facing us with expectant faces. One of their number,
     taller and older than the others, stood forward with an air of
     lounding superiority which was very funny in such a disreputable
     little carecrow.

     "Got your message, sir," said he, "and brought 'em on sharp. Three
     bob and a tanner for tickets."

     "Here you are," said Holmes, producing some silver. "In future they
     can report to you, Wiggins, and you to me. I cannot have the house
     invaded in this way. However, it is just as well that you should all
     hear the instructions. I want to find the whereabouts of a steam
     launch called the Aurora, owner Mordecai Smith, black with two red
     streaks, funnel black with a white band. She is down the river
     somewhere. I want one boy to be at Mordecai Smith's landing-stage
     opposite Millbank to say if the boat comes back. You must divide it
     out among yourselves, and do both banks thoroughly. Let me know the
     moment you have news. Is that all clear?"

     "Yes, guv'nor," said Wiggins.

     "The old scale of pay, and a guinea to the boy who finds the boat.
     Here's a day in advance. Now off you go!" He handed them a shilling
     each, and away they buzzed down the stairs, and I saw them a moment
     later streaming down the street.

     "If the launch is above water they will find her," said Holmes, as he
     rose from the table and lit his pipe. "They can go everywhere, see
     everything, overhear every one. I expect to hear before evening that
     they have spotted her. In the mean while, we can do nothing but await
     results. We cannot pick up the broken trail until we find either the
     Aurora or Mr. Mordecai Smith."

     "Toby could eat these scraps, I dare say. Are you going to bed,
     Holmes?"

     "No: I am not tired. I have a curious constitution. I never remember
     feeling tired by work, though idleness exhausts me completely. I am
     going to smoke and to think over this queer business to which my fair
     client has introduced us. If ever man had an easy task, this of ours
     ought to be. Wooden-legged men are not so common, but the other man
     must, I should think, be absolutely unique."

     "That other man again!"

     "I have no wish to make a mystery of him,--to you, anyway. But you
     must have formed your own opinion. Now, do consider the data.
     Diminutive footmarks, toes never fettered by boots, naked feet,
     stone-headed wooden mace, great agility, small poisoned darts. What
     do you make of all this?"

     "A savage!" I exclaimed. "Perhaps one of those Indians who were the
     associates of Jonathan Small."

     "Hardly that," said he. "When first I saw signs of strange weapons I
     was inclined to think so; but the remarkable character of the
     footmarks caused me to reconsider my views. Some of the inhabitants
     of the Indian Peninsula are small men, but none could have left such
     marks as that. The Hindoo proper has long and thin feet. The
     sandal-wearing Mohammedan has the great toe well separated from the
     others, because the thong is commonly passed between. These little
     darts, too, could only be shot in one way. They are from a blow-pipe.
     Now, then, where are we to find our savage?"

     "South American," I hazarded.

     He stretched his hand up, and took down a bulky volume from the
     shelf. "This is the first volume of a gazetteer which is now being
     published. It may be looked upon as the very latest authority. What
     have we here? 'Andaman Islands, situated 340 miles to the north of
     Sumatra, in the Bay of Bengal.' Hum! hum!  What's all this? Moist
     climate, coral reefs, sharks, Port Blair, convict-barracks, Rutland
     Island, cottonwoods--Ah, here we are. 'The aborigines of the Andaman
     Islands may perhaps claim the distinction of being the smallest race
     upon this earth, though some anthropologists prefer the Bushmen of
     Africa, the Digger Indians of America, and the Terra del Fuegians.
     The average height is rather below four feet, although many
     full-grown adults may be found who are very much smaller than this.
     They are a fierce, morose, and intractable people, though capable of
     forming most devoted friendships when their confidence has once been
     gained.' Mark that, Watson. Now, then, listen to this. 'They are
     naturally hideous, having large, misshapen heads, small, fierce eyes,
     and distorted features. Their feet and hands, however, are remarkably
     small. So intractable and fierce are they that all the efforts of the
     British official have failed to win them over in any degree. They
     have always been a terror to shipwrecked crews, braining the
     survivors with their stone-headed clubs, or shooting them with their
     poisoned arrows. These massacres are invariably concluded by a
     cannibal feast.' Nice, amiable people, Watson! If this fellow had
     been left to his own unaided devices this affair might have taken an
     even more ghastly turn. I fancy that, even as it is, Jonathan Small
     would give a good deal not to have employed him."

     "But how came he to have so singular a companion?"

     "Ah, that is more than I can tell. Since, however, we had already
     determined that Small had come from the Andamans, it is not so very
     wonderful that this islander should be with him. No doubt we shall
     know all about it in time. Look here, Watson; you look regularly
     done. Lie down there on the sofa, and see if I can put you to sleep."

     He took up his violin from the corner, and as I stretched myself out
     he began to play some low, dreamy, melodious air,--his own, no doubt,
     for he had a remarkable gift for improvisation. I have a vague
     remembrance of his gaunt limbs, his earnest face, and the rise and
     fall of his bow. Then I seemed to be floated peacefully away upon a
     soft sea of sound, until I found myself in dream-land, with the sweet
     face of Mary Morstan looking down upon me.





          CHAPTER IX
          A Break in the Chain


     It was late in the afternoon before I woke, strengthened and
     refreshed. Sherlock Holmes still sat exactly as I had left him, save
     that he had laid aside his violin and was deep in a book. He looked
     across at me, as I stirred, and I noticed that his face was dark and
     troubled.

     "You have slept soundly," he said. "I feared that our talk would wake
     you."

     "I heard nothing," I answered. "Have you had fresh news, then?"

     "Unfortunately, no. I confess that I am surprised and disappointed. I
     expected something definite by this time.  Wiggins has just been up
     to report. He says that no trace can be found of the launch. It is a
     provoking check, for every hour is of importance."

     "Can I do anything? I am perfectly fresh now, and quite ready for
     another night's outing."

     "No, we can do nothing. We can only wait. If we go ourselves, the
     message might come in our absence, and delay be caused. You can do
     what you will, but I must remain on guard."

     "Then I shall run over to Camberwell and call upon Mrs. Cecil
     Forrester. She asked me to, yesterday."

     "On Mrs. Cecil Forrester?" asked Holmes, with the twinkle of a smile
     in his eyes.

     "Well, of course Miss Morstan too. They were anxious to hear what
     happened."

     "I would not tell them too much," said Holmes. "Women are never to be
     entirely trusted,--not the best of them."

     I did not pause to argue over this atrocious sentiment. "I shall be
     back in an hour or two," I remarked.

     "All right! Good luck! But, I say, if you are crossing the river you
     may as well return Toby, for I don't think it is at all likely that
     we shall have any use for him now."

     I took our mongrel accordingly, and left him, together with a
     half-sovereign, at the old naturalist's in Pinchin Lane. At
     Camberwell I found Miss Morstan a little weary after her night's
     adventures, but very eager to hear the news. Mrs. Forrester, too, was
     full of curiosity. I told them all that we had done, suppressing,
     however, the more dreadful parts of the tragedy. Thus, although I
     spoke of Mr. Sholto's death, I said nothing of the exact manner and
     method of it. With all my omissions, however, there was enough to
     startle and amaze them.

     "It is a romance!" cried Mrs. Forrester. "An injured lady, half a
     million in treasure, a black cannibal, and a wooden-legged ruffian.
     They take the place of the conventional dragon or wicked earl."

     "And two knight-errants to the rescue," added Miss Morstan, with a
     bright glance at me.

     "Why, Mary, your fortune depends upon the issue of this search. I
     don't think that you are nearly excited enough. Just imagine what it
     must be to be so rich, and to have the world at your feet!"

     It sent a little thrill of joy to my heart to notice that she showed
     no sign of elation at the prospect. On the contrary, she gave a toss
     of her proud head, as though the matter were one in which she took
     small interest.

     "It is for Mr. Thaddeus Sholto that I am anxious," she said. "Nothing
     else is of any consequence; but I think that he has behaved most
     kindly and honorably throughout. It is our duty to clear him of this
     dreadful and unfounded charge."

     It was evening before I left Camberwell, and quite dark by the time I
     reached home. My companion's book and pipe lay by his chair, but he
     had disappeared. I looked about in the hope of seeing a note, but
     there was none.

     "I suppose that Mr. Sherlock Holmes has gone out," I said to Mrs. 
     Hudson as she came up to lower the blinds.

     "No, sir. He has gone to his room, sir. Do you know, sir," sinking
     her voice into an impressive whisper, "I am afraid for his health?"

     "Why so, Mrs. Hudson?"

     "Well, he's that strange, sir. After you was gone he walked and he
     walked, up and down, and up and down, until I was weary of the sound
     of his footstep. Then I heard him talking to himself and muttering,
     and every time the bell rang out he came on the stairhead, with 'What
     is that, Mrs. Hudson?' And now he has slammed off to his room, but I
     can hear him walking away the same as ever. I hope he's not going to
     be ill, sir. I ventured to say something to him about cooling
     medicine, but he turned on me, sir, with such a look that I don't
     know how ever I got out of the room."

     "I don't think that you have any cause to be uneasy, Mrs. Hudson," I
     answered. "I have seen him like this before. He has some small matter
     upon his mind which makes him restless." I tried to speak lightly to
     our worthy landlady, but I was myself somewhat uneasy when through
     the long night I still from time to time heard the dull sound of his
     tread, and knew how his keen spirit was chafing against this
     involuntary inaction.

     At breakfast-time he looked worn and haggard, with a little fleck of
     feverish color upon either cheek.

     "You are knocking yourself up, old man," I remarked. "I heard you
     marching about in the night."

     "No, I could not sleep," he answered. "This infernal problem is
     consuming me. It is too much to be balked by so petty an obstacle,
     when all else had been overcome. I know the men, the launch,
     everything; and yet I can get no news. I have set other agencies at
     work, and used every means at my disposal. The whole river has been
     searched on either side, but there is no news, nor has Mrs. Smith
     heard of her husband. I shall come to the conclusion soon that they
     have scuttled the craft. But there are objections to that."

     "Or that Mrs. Smith has put us on a wrong scent."

     "No, I think that may be dismissed. I had inquiries made, and there
     is a launch of that description."

     "Could it have gone up the river?"

     "I have considered that possibility too, and there is a search-party
     who will work up as far as Richmond. If no news comes to-day, I shall
     start off myself to-morrow, and go for the men rather than the boat.
     But surely, surely, we shall hear something."

     We did not, however. Not a word came to us either from Wiggins or
     from the other agencies. There were articles in most of the papers
     upon the Norwood tragedy. They all appeared to be rather hostile to
     the unfortunate Thaddeus Sholto. No fresh details were to be found,
     however, in any of them, save that an inquest was to be held upon the
     following day. I walked over to Camberwell in the evening to report
     our ill success to the ladies, and on my return I found Holmes
     dejected and somewhat morose. He would hardly reply to my questions,
     and busied himself all evening in an abstruse chemical analysis which
     involved much heating of retorts and distilling of vapors, ending at
     last in a smell which fairly drove me out of the apartment. Up to the
     small hours of the morning I could hear the clinking of his
     test-tubes which told me that he was still engaged in his malodorous
     experiment.

     In the early dawn I woke with a start, and was surprised to find him
     standing by my bedside, clad in a rude sailor dress with a
     pea-jacket, and a coarse red scarf round his neck.

     "I am off down the river, Watson," said he. "I have been turning it
     over in my mind, and I can see only one way out of it. It is worth
     trying, at all events."

     "Surely I can come with you, then?" said I.

     "No; you can be much more useful if you will remain here as my
     representative. I am loath to go, for it is quite on the cards that
     some message may come during the day, though Wiggins was despondent
     about it last night. I want you to open all notes and telegrams, and
     to act on your own judgment if any news should come. Can I rely upon
     you?"

     "Most certainly."

     "I am afraid that you will not be able to wire to me, for I can
     hardly tell yet where I may find myself. If I am in luck, however, I
     may not be gone so very long. I shall have news of some sort or other
     before I get back."

     I had heard nothing of him by breakfast-time. On opening the
     Standard, however, I found that there was a fresh allusion to the
     business.

     "With reference to the Upper Norwood tragedy," it remarked, "we have
     reason to believe that the matter promises to be even more complex
     and mysterious than was originally supposed. Fresh evidence has shown
     that it is quite impossible that Mr. Thaddeus Sholto could have been
     in any way concerned in the matter. He and the housekeeper, Mrs.
     Bernstone, were both released yesterday evening. It is believed,
     however, that the police have a clue as to the real culprits, and
     that it is being prosecuted by Mr. Athelney Jones, of Scotland Yard,
     with all his well-known energy and sagacity. Further arrests may be
     expected at any moment."

     "That is satisfactory so far as it goes," thought I. "Friend Sholto
     is safe, at any rate. I wonder what the fresh clue may be; though it
     seems to be a stereotyped form whenever the police have made a
     blunder."

     I tossed the paper down upon the table, but at that moment my eye
     caught an advertisement in the agony column. It ran in this way:

     "Lost.--Whereas Mordecai Smith, boatman, and his son, Jim, left
     Smith's Wharf at or about three o'clock last Tuesday morning in the
     steam launch Aurora, black with two red stripes, funnel black with a
     white band, the sum of five pounds will be paid to any one who can
     give information to Mrs. Smith, at Smith's Wharf, or at 221b Baker
     Street, as to the whereabouts of the said Mordecai Smith and the
     launch Aurora."

     This was clearly Holmes's doing. The Baker Street address was enough
     to prove that. It struck me as rather ingenious, because it might be
     read by the fugitives without their seeing in it more than the
     natural anxiety of a wife for her missing husband.

     It was a long day. Every time that a knock came to the door, or a
     sharp step passed in the street, I imagined that it was either Holmes
     returning or an answer to his advertisement. I tried to read, but my
     thoughts would wander off to our strange quest and to the
     ill-assorted and villainous pair whom we were pursuing. Could there
     be, I wondered, some radical flaw in my companion's reasoning. Might
     he be suffering from some huge self-deception? Was it not possible
     that his nimble and speculative mind had built up this wild theory
     upon faulty premises? I had never known him to be wrong; and yet the
     keenest reasoner may occasionally be deceived. He was likely, I
     thought, to fall into error through the over-refinement of his
     logic,--his preference for a subtle and bizarre explanation when a
     plainer and more commonplace one lay ready to his hand. Yet, on the
     other hand, I had myself seen the evidence, and I had heard the
     reasons for his deductions. When I looked back on the long chain of
     curious circumstances, many of them trivial in themselves, but all
     tending in the same direction, I could not disguise from myself that
     even if Holmes's explanation were incorrect the true theory must be
     equally outr?and startling.

     At three o'clock in the afternoon there was a loud peal at the bell,
     an authoritative voice in the hall, and, to my surprise, no less a
     person than Mr. Athelney Jones was shown up to me. Very different was
     he, however, from the brusque and masterful professor of common sense
     who had taken over the case so confidently at Upper Norwood. His
     expression was downcast, and his bearing meek and even apologetic.

     "Good-day, sir; good-day," said he. "Mr. Sherlock Holmes is out, I
     understand."

     "Yes, and I cannot be sure when he will be back. But perhaps you
     would care to wait. Take that chair and try one of these cigars."

     "Thank you; I don't mind if I do," said he, mopping his face with a
     red bandanna handkerchief.

     "And a whiskey-and-soda?"

     "Well, half a glass. It is very hot for the time of year; and I have
     had a good deal to worry and try me. You know my theory about this
     Norwood case?"

     "I remember that you expressed one."

     "Well, I have been obliged to reconsider it. I had my net drawn
     tightly round Mr. Sholto, sir, when pop he went through a hole in the
     middle of it. He was able to prove an alibi which could not be
     shaken. From the time that he left his brother's room he was never
     out of sight of some one or other. So it could not be he who climbed
     over roofs and through trap-doors. It's a very dark case, and my
     professional credit is at stake. I should be very glad of a little
     assistance."

     "We all need help sometimes," said I.

     "Your friend Mr. Sherlock Holmes is a wonderful man, sir," said he,
     in a husky and confidential voice. "He's a man who is not to be beat.
     I have known that young man go into a good many cases, but I never
     saw the case yet that he could not throw a light upon. He is
     irregular in his methods, and a little quick perhaps in jumping at
     theories, but, on the whole, I think he would have made a most
     promising officer, and I don't care who knows it. I have had a wire
     from him this morning, by which I understand that he has got some
     clue to this Sholto business. Here is the message."

     He took the telegram out of his pocket, and handed it to me. It was
     dated from Poplar at twelve o'clock. "Go to Baker Street at once," it
     said. "If I have not returned, wait for me. I am close on the track
     of the Sholto gang. You can come with us to-night if you want to be
     in at the finish."

     "This sounds well. He has evidently picked up the scent again," said
     I.

     "Ah, then he has been at fault too," exclaimed Jones, with evident
     satisfaction. "Even the best of us are thrown off sometimes. Of
     course this may prove to be a false alarm; but it is my duty as an
     officer of the law to allow no chance to slip. But there is some one
     at the door. Perhaps this is he."

     A heavy step was heard ascending the stair, with a great wheezing and
     rattling as from a man who was sorely put to it for breath. Once or
     twice he stopped, as though the climb were too much for him, but at
     last he made his way to our door and entered. His appearance
     corresponded to the sounds which we had heard. He was an aged man,
     clad in seafaring garb, with an old pea-jacket buttoned up to his
     throat. His back was bowed, his knees were shaky, and his breathing
     was painfully asthmatic. As he leaned upon a thick oaken cudgel his
     shoulders heaved in the effort to draw the air into his lungs. He had
     a colored scarf round his chin, and I could see little of his face
     save a pair of keen dark eyes, overhung by bushy white brows, and
     long gray side-whiskers. Altogether he gave me the impression of a
     respectable master mariner who had fallen into years and poverty.

     "What is it, my man?" I asked.

     He looked about him in the slow methodical fashion of old age.

     "Is Mr. Sherlock Holmes here?" said he.

     "No; but I am acting for him. You can tell me any message you have
     for him."

     "It was to him himself I was to tell it," said he.

     "But I tell you that I am acting for him. Was it about Mordecai
     Smith's boat?"

     "Yes. I knows well where it is. An' I knows where the men he is after
     are. An' I knows where the treasure is. I knows all about it."

     "Then tell me, and I shall let him know."

     "It was to him I was to tell it," he repeated, with the petulant
     obstinacy of a very old man.

     "Well, you must wait for him."

     "No, no; I ain't goin' to lose a whole day to please no one. If Mr.
     Holmes ain't here, then Mr. Holmes must find it all out for himself.
     I don't care about the look of either of you, and I won't tell a
     word."

     He shuffled towards the door, but Athelney Jones got in front of him.

     "Wait a bit, my friend," said he. "You have important information,
     and you must not walk off. We shall keep you, whether you like or
     not, until our friend returns."

     The old man made a little run towards the door, but, as Athelney
     Jones put his broad back up against it, he recognized the uselessness
     of resistance.

     "Pretty sort o' treatment this!" he cried, stamping his stick. "I
     come here to see a gentleman, and you two, who I never saw in my
     life, seize me and treat me in this fashion!"

     "You will be none the worse," I said. "We shall recompense you for
     the loss of your time. Sit over here on the sofa, and you will not
     have long to wait."

     He came across sullenly enough, and seated himself with his face
     resting on his hands. Jones and I resumed our cigars and our talk.
     Suddenly, however, Holmes's voice broke in upon us.

     "I think that you might offer me a cigar too," he said.

     We both started in our chairs. There was Holmes sitting close to us
     with an air of quiet amusement.

     "Holmes!" I exclaimed. "You here! But where is the old man?"

     "Here is the old man," said he, holding out a heap of white hair.
     "Here he is,--wig, whiskers, eyebrows, and all. I thought my disguise
     was pretty good, but I hardly expected that it would stand that
     test."

     "Ah, you rogue!" cried Jones, highly delighted. "You would have made
     an actor, and a rare one. You had the proper workhouse cough, and
     those weak legs of yours are worth ten pound a week. I thought I knew
     the glint of your eye, though. You didn't get away from us so easily,
     you see."

     "I have been working in that get-up all day," said he, lighting his
     cigar. "You see, a good many of the criminal classes begin to know
     me,--especially since our friend here took to publishing some of my
     cases: so I can only go on the war-path under some simple disguise
     like this. You got my wire?"

     "Yes; that was what brought me here."

     "How has your case prospered?"

     "It has all come to nothing. I have had to release two of my
     prisoners, and there is no evidence against the other two."

     "Never mind. We shall give you two others in the place of them. But
     you must put yourself under my orders. You are welcome to all the
     official credit, but you must act on the line that I point out. Is
     that agreed?"

     "Entirely, if you will help me to the men."

     "Well, then, in the first place I shall want a fast police-boat--a
     steam launch--to be at the Westminster Stairs at seven o'clock."

     "That is easily managed. There is always one about there; but I can
     step across the road and telephone to make sure."

     "Then I shall want two stanch men, in case of resistance."

     "There will be two or three in the boat. What else?"

     "When we secure the men we shall get the treasure. I think that it
     would be a pleasure to my friend here to take the box round to the
     young lady to whom half of it rightfully belongs. Let her be the
     first to open it.--Eh, Watson?"

     "It would be a great pleasure to me."

     "Rather an irregular proceeding," said Jones, shaking his head.
     "However, the whole thing is irregular, and I suppose we must wink at
     it. The treasure must afterwards be handed over to the authorities
     until after the official investigation."

     "Certainly. That is easily managed. One other point. I should much
     like to have a few details about this matter from the lips of
     Jonathan Small himself. You know I like to work the detail of my
     cases out. There is no objection to my having an unofficial interview
     with him, either here in my rooms or elsewhere, as long as he is
     efficiently guarded?"

     "Well, you are master of the situation. I have had no proof yet of
     the existence of this Jonathan Small. However, if you can catch him I
     don't see how I can refuse you an interview with him."

     "That is understood, then?"

     "Perfectly. Is there anything else?"

     "Only that I insist upon your dining with us. It will be ready in
     half an hour. I have oysters and a brace of grouse, with something a
     little choice in white wines.--Watson, you have never yet recognized
     my merits as a housekeeper."





          CHAPTER X
          The End of the Islander


     Our meal was a merry one. Holmes coud talk exceedingly well when he
     chose, and that night he did choose. He appeared to be in a state of
     nervous exaltation. I have never known him so brilliant. He spoke on
     a quick succession of subjects,--on miracle-plays, on medieval
     pottery, on Stradivarius violins, on the Buddhism of Ceylon, and on
     the war-ships of the future,--handling each as though he had made a
     special study of it. His bright humor marked the reaction from his
     black depression of the preceding days. Athelney Jones proved to be a
     sociable soul in his hours of relaxation, and face his dinner with
     the air of a bon vivant. For myself, I felt elated at the thought
     that we were nearing the end of our task, and I caught something of
     Holmes's gaiety. None of us alluded during dinner to the cause which
     had brought us together.

     When the cloth was cleared, Holmes glanced at this watch, and filled
     up three glasses with port. "One bumper," said he, "to the success of
     our little expedition. And now it is high time we were off. Have you
     a pistol, Watson?"

     "I have my old service-revolver in my desk."

     "You had best take it, then. It is well to be prepared. I see that
     the cab is at the door. I ordered it for half-past six."

     It was a little past seven before we reached the Westminster wharf,
     and found our launch awaiting us. Holmes eyed it critically.

     "Is there anything to mark it as a police-boat?"

     "Yes,--that green lamp at the side."

     "Then take it off."

     The small change was made, we stepped on board, and the ropes were
     cast off. Jones, Holmes, and I sat in the stern. There was one man at
     the rudder, one to tend the engines, and two burly police-inspectors
     forward.

     "Where to?" asked Jones.

     "To the Tower. Tell them to stop opposite Jacobson's Yard."

     Our craft was evidently a very fast one. We shot past the long lines
     of loaded barges as though they were stationary. Holmes smiled with
     satisfaction as we overhauled a river steamer and left her behind us.

     "We ought to be able to catch anything on the river," he said.

     "Well, hardly that. But there are not many launches to beat us."

     "We shall have to catch the Aurora, and she has a name for being a
     clipper. I will tell you how the land lies, Watson. You recollect how
     annoyed I was at being balked by so small a thing?"

     "Yes."

     "Well, I gave my mind a thorough rest by plunging into a chemical
     analysis. One of our greatest statesmen has said that a change of
     work is the best rest. So it is. When I had succeeded in dissolving
     the hydrocarbon which I was at work at, I came back to our problem of
     the Sholtos, and thought the whole matter out again. My boys had been
     up the river and down the river without result. The launch was not at
     any landing-stage or wharf, nor had it returned. Yet it could hardly
     have been scuttled to hide their traces,--though that always remained
     as a possible hypothesis if all else failed. I knew this man Small
     had a certain degree of low cunning, but I did not think him capable
     of anything in the nature of delicate finesse. That is usually a
     product of higher education. I then reflected that since he had
     certainly been in London some time--as we had evidence that he
     maintained a continual watch over Pondicherry Lodge--he could hardly
     leave at a moment's notice, but would need some little time, if it
     were only a day, to arrange his affairs. That was the balance of
     probability, at any rate."

     "It seems to me to be a little weak," said I. "It is more probable
     that he had arranged his affairs before ever he set out upon his
     expedition."

     "No, I hardly think so. This lair of his would be too valuable a
     retreat in case of need for him to give it up until he was sure that
     he could do without it. But a second consideration struck me.
     Jonathan Small must have felt that the peculiar appearance of his
     companion, however much he may have top-coated him, would give rise
     to gossip, and possibly be associated with this Norwood tragedy. He
     was quite sharp enough to see that. They had started from their
     head-quarters under cover of darkness, and he would wish to get back
     before it was broad light. Now, it was past three o'clock, according
     to Mrs. Smith, when they got the boat. It would be quite bright, and
     people would be about in an hour or so. Therefore, I argued, they did
     not go very far. They paid Smith well to hold his tongue, reserved
     his launch for the final escape, and hurried to their lodgings with
     the treasure-box. In a couple of nights, when they had time to see
     what view the papers took, and whether there was any suspicion, they
     would make their way under cover of darkness to some ship at
     Gravesend or in the Downs, where no doubt they had already arranged
     for passages to America or the Colonies."

     "But the launch? They could not have taken that to their lodgings."

     "Quite so. I argued that the launch must be no great way off, in
     spite of its invisibility. I then put myself in the place of Small,
     and looked at it as a man of his capacity would. He would probably
     consider that to send back the launch or to keep it at a wharf would
     make pursuit easy if the police did happen to get on his track. How,
     then, could he conceal the launch and yet have her at hand when
     wanted? I wondered what I should do myself if I were in his shoes. I
     could only think of one way of doing it. I might land the launch over
     to some boat-builder or repairer, with directions to make a trifling
     change in her. She would then be removed to his shed or hard, and so
     be effectually concealed, while at the same time I could have her at
     a few hours' notice."

     "That seems simple enough."

     "It is just these very simple things which are extremely liable to be
     overlooked. However, I determined to act on the idea. I started at
     once in this harmless seaman's rig and inquired at all the yards down
     the river. I drew blank at fifteen, but at the
     sixteenth--Jacobson's--I learned that the Aurora had been handed over
     to them two days ago by a wooden-legged man, with some trivial
     directions as to her rudder. 'There ain't naught amiss with her
     rudder,' said the foreman. 'There she lies, with the red streaks.' At
     that moment who should come down but Mordecai Smith, the missing
     owner? He was rather the worse for liquor. I should not, of course,
     have known him, but he bellowed out his name and the name of his
     launch. 'I want her to-night at eight o'clock,' said he,--'eight
     o'clock sharp, mind, for I have two gentlemen who won't be kept
     waiting.' They had evidently paid him well, for he was very flush of
     money, chucking shillings about to the men. I followed him some
     distance, but he subsided into an ale-house: so I went back to the
     yard, and, happening to pick up one of my boys on the way, I
     stationed him as a sentry over the launch. He is to stand at water's
     edge and wave his handkerchief to us when they start. We shall be
     lying off in the stream, and it will be a strange thing if we do not
     take men, treasure, and all."

     "You have planned it all very neatly, whether they are the right men
     or not," said Jones; "but if the affair were in my hands I should
     have had a body of police in Jacobson's Yard, and arrested them when
     they came down."

     "Which would have been never. This man Small is a pretty shrewd
     fellow. He would send a scout on ahead, and if anything made him
     suspicious lie snug for another week."

     "But you might have stuck to Mordecai Smith, and so been led to their
     hiding-place," said I.

     "In that case I should have wasted my day. I think that it is a
     hundred to one against Smith knowing where they live. As long as he
     has liquor and good pay, why should he ask questions? They send him
     messages what to do. No, I thought over every possible course, and
     this is the best."

     While this conversation had been proceeding, we had been shooting the
     long series of bridges which span the Thames. As we passed the City
     the last rays of the sun were gilding the cross upon the summit of
     St. Paul's. It was twilight before we reached the Tower.

     "That is Jacobson's Yard," said Holmes, pointing to a bristle of
     masts and rigging on the Surrey side. "Cruise gently up and down here
     under cover of this string of lighters." He took a pair of
     night-glasses from his pocket and gazed some time at the shore. "I
     see my sentry at his post," he remarked, "but no sign of a
     handkerchief."

     "Suppose we go down-stream a short way and lie in wait for them,"
     said Jones, eagerly. We were all eager by this time, even the
     policemen and stokers, who had a very vague idea of what was going
     forward.

     "We have no right to take anything for granted," Holmes answered. "It
     is certainly ten to one that they go down-stream, but we cannot be
     certain. From this point we can see the entrance of the yard, and
     they can hardly see us. It will be a clear night and plenty of light.
     We must stay where we are. See how the folk swarm over yonder in the
     gaslight."

     "They are coming from work in the yard."

     "Dirty-looking rascals, but I suppose every one has some little
     immortal spark concealed about him. You would not think it, to look
     at them. There is no a priori probability about it. A strange enigma
     is man!"

     "Some one calls him a soul concealed in an animal," I suggested.

     "Winwood Reade is good upon the subject," said Holmes. "He remarks
     that, while the individual man is an insoluble puzzle, in the
     aggregate he becomes a mathematical certainty. You can, for example,
     never foretell what any one man will do, but you can say with
     precision what an average number will be up to. Individuals vary, but
     percentages remain constant. So says the statistician. But do I see a
     handkerchief? Surely there is a white flutter over yonder."

     "Yes, it is your boy," I cried. "I can see him plainly."

     "And there is the Aurora," exclaimed Holmes, "and going like the
     devil! Full speed ahead, engineer. Make after that launch with the
     yellow light. By heaven, I shall never forgive myself if she proves
     to have the heels of us!"

     She had slipped unseen through the yard-entrance and passed behind
     two or three small craft, so that she had fairly got her speed up
     before we saw her. Now she was flying down the stream, near in to the
     shore, going at a tremendous rate. Jones looked gravely at her and
     shook his head.

     "She is very fast," he said. "I doubt if we shall catch her."

     "We must catch her!" cried Holmes, between his teeth. "Heap it on,
     stokers! Make her do all she can! If we burn the boat we must have
     them!"

     We were fairly after her now. The furnaces roared, and the powerful
     engines whizzed and clanked, like a great metallic heart. Her sharp,
     steep prow cut through the river-water and sent two rolling waves to
     right and to left of us. With every throb of the engines we sprang
     and quivered like a living thing. One great yellow lantern in our
     bows threw a long, flickering funnel of light in front of us. Right
     ahead a dark blur upon the water showed where the Aurora lay, and the
     swirl of white foam behind her spoke of the pace at which she was
     going. We flashed past barges, steamers, merchant-vessels, in and
     out, behind this one and round the other. Voices hailed us out of the
     darkness, but still the Aurora thundered on, and still we followed
     close upon her track.

     "Pile it on, men, pile it on!" cried Holmes, looking down into the
     engine-room, while the fierce glow from below beat upon his eager,
     aquiline face. "Get every pound of steam you can."

     "I think we gain a little," said Jones, with his eyes on thea Aurora.

     "I am sure of it," said I. "We shall be up with her in a very few
     minutes."

     At that moment, however, as our evil fate would have it, a tug with
     three barges in tow blundered in between us. It was only by putting
     our helm hard down that we avoided a collision, and before we could
     round them and recover our way the Aurora had gained a good two
     hundred yards. She was still, however, well in view, and the murky
     uncertain twilight was setting into a clear starlit night. Our
     boilers were strained to their utmost, and the frail shell vibrated
     and creaked with the fierce energy which was driving us along. We had
     shot through the Pool, past the West India Docks, down the long
     Deptford Reach, and up again after rounding the Isle of Dogs. The
     dull blur in front of us resolved itself now clearly enough into the
     dainty Aurora. Jones turned our search-light upon her, so that we
     could plainly see the figures upon her deck. One man sat by the
     stern, with something black between his knees over which he stooped.
     Beside him lay a dark mass which looked like a Newfoundland dog. The
     boy held the tiller, while against the red glare of the furnace I
     could see old Smith, stripped to the waist, and shovelling coals for
     dear life. They may have had some doubt at first as to whether we
     were really pursuing them, but now as we followed every winding and
     turning which they took there could no longer be any question about
     it. At Greenwich we were about three hundred paces behind them. At
     Blackwall we could not have been more than two hundred and fifty. I
     have coursed many creatures in many countries during my checkered
     career, but never did sport give me such a wild thrill as this mad,
     flying man-hunt down the Thames. Steadily we drew in upon them, yard
     by yard. In the silence of the night we could hear the panting and
     clanking of their machinery. The man in the stern still crouched upon
     the deck, and his arms were moving as though he were busy, while
     every now and then he would look up and measure with a glance the
     distance which still separated us. Nearer we came and nearer. Jones
     yelled to them to stop. We were not more than four boat's lengths
     behind them, both boats flying at a tremendous pace. It was a clear
     reach of the river, with Barking Level upon one side and the
     melancholy Plumstead Marshes upon the other. At our hail the man in
     the stern sprang up from the deck and shook his two clinched fists at
     us, cursing the while in a high, cracked voice. He was a good-sized,
     powerful man, and as he stood poising himself with legs astride I
     could see that from the thigh downwards there was but a wooden stump
     upon the right side. At the sound of his strident, angry cries there
     was movement in the huddled bundle upon the deck. It straightened
     itself into a little black man--the smallest I have ever seen--with a
     great, misshapen head and a shock of tangled, dishevelled hair.
     Holmes had already drawn his revolver, and I whipped out mine at the
     sight of this savage, distorted creature. He was wrapped in some sort
     of dark ulster or blanket, which left only his face exposed; but that
     face was enough to give a man a sleepless night. Never have I seen
     features so deeply marked with all bestiality and cruelty. His small
     eyes glowed and burned with a sombre light, and his thick lips were
     writhed back from his teeth, which grinned and chattered at us with a
     half animal fury.

     "Fire if he raises his hand," said Holmes, quietly. We were within a
     boat's-length by this time, and almost within touch of our quarry. I
     can see the two of them now as they stood, the white man with his
     legs far apart, shrieking out curses, and the unhallowed dwarf with
     his hideous face, and his strong yellow teeth gnashing at us in the
     light of our lantern.

     It was well that we had so clear a view of him. Even as we looked he
     plucked out from under his covering a short, round piece of wood,
     like a school-ruler, and clapped it to his lips. Our pistols rang out
     together. He whirled round, threw up his arms, and with a kind of
     choking cough fell sideways into the stream. I caught one glimpse of
     his venomous, menacing eyes amid the white swirl of the waters. At
     the same moment the wooden-legged man threw himself upon the rudder
     and put it hard down, so that his boat made straight in for the
     southern bank, while we shot past her stern, only clearing her by a
     few feet. We were round after her in an instant, but she was already
     nearly at the bank. It was a wild and desolate place, where the moon
     glimmered upon a wide expanse of marsh-land, with pools of stagnant
     water and beds of decaying vegetation. The launch with a dull thud
     ran up upon the mud-bank, with her bow in the air and her stern flush
     with the water. The fugitive sprang out, but his stump instantly sank
     its whole length into the sodden soil. In vain he struggled and
     writhed. Not one step could he possibly take either forwards or
     backwards. He yelled in impotent rage, and kicked frantically into
     the mud with his other foot, but his struggles only bored his wooden
     pin the deeper into the sticky bank. When we brought our launch
     alongside he was so firmly anchored that it was only by throwing the
     end of a rope over his shoulders that we were able to haul him out,
     and to drag him, like some evil fish, over our side. The two Smiths,
     father and son, sat sullenly in their launch, but came aboard meekly
     enough when commanded. The Aurora herself we hauled off and made fast
     to our stern. A solid iron chest of Indian workmanship stood upon the
     deck. This, there could be no question, was the same that had
     contained the ill-omened treasure of the Sholtos. There was no key,
     but it was of considerable weight, so we transferred it carefully to
     our own little cabin. As we steamed slowly up-stream again, we
     flashed our search-light in every direction, but there was no sign of
     the Islander. Somewhere in the dark ooze at the bottom of the Thames
     lie the bones of that strange visitor to our shores.

     "See here," said Holmes, pointing to the wooden hatchway. "We were
     hardly quick enough with our pistols." There, sure enough, just
     behind where we had been standing, stuck one of those murderous darts
     which we knew so well. It must have whizzed between us at the instant
     that we fired. Holmes smiled at it and shrugged his shoulders in his
     easy fashion, but I confess that it turned me sick to think of the
     horrible death which had passed so close to us that night.





          CHAPTER XI
          The Great Agra Treasure


     Our captive sat in the cabin opposite to the iron box which he had
     done so much and waited so long to gain. He was a sunburned,
     reckless-eyed fellow, with a net-work of lines and wrinkles all over
     his mahogany features, which told of a hard, open-air life. There was
     a singular prominence about his bearded chin which marked a man who
     was not to be easily turned from his purpose. His age may have been
     fifty or thereabouts, for his black, curly hair was thickly shot with
     gray. His face in repose was not an unpleasing one, though his heavy
     brows and aggressive chin gave him, as I had lately seen, a terrible
     expression when moved to anger. He sat now with his handcuffed hands
     upon his lap, and his head sunk upon his breast, while he looked with
     his keen, twinkling eyes at the box which had been the cause of his
     ill-doings. It seemed to me that there was more sorrow than anger in
     his rigid and contained countenance. Once he looked up at me with a
     gleam of something like humor in his eyes.

     "Well, Jonathan Small," said Holmes, lighting a cigar, "I am sorry
     that it has come to this."

     "And so am I, sir," he answered, frankly. "I don't believe that I can
     swing over the job. I give you my word on the book that I never
     raised hand against Mr. Sholto. It was that little hell-hound Tonga
     who shot one of his cursed darts into him. I had no part in it, sir.
     I was as grieved as if it had been my blood-relation. I welted the
     little devil with the slack end of the rope for it, but it was done,
     and I could not undo it again."

     "Have a cigar," said Holmes; "and you had best take a pull out of my
     flask, for you are very wet. How could you expect so small and weak a
     man as this black fellow to overpower Mr. Sholto and hold him while
     you were climbing the rope?"

     "You seem to know as much about it as if you were there, sir. The
     truth is that I hoped to find the room clear. I knew the habits of
     the house pretty well, and it was the time when Mr. Sholto usually
     went down to his supper. I shall make no secret of the business. The
     best defence that I can make is just the simple truth. Now, if it had
     been the old major I would have swung for him with a light heart. I
     would have thought no more of knifing him than of smoking this cigar.
     But it's cursed hard that I should be lagged over this young Sholto,
     with whom I had no quarrel whatever."

     "You are under the charge of Mr. Athelney Jones, of Scotland Yard. He
     is going to bring you up to my rooms, and I shall ask you for a true
     account of the matter. You must make a clean breast of it, for if you
     do I hope that I may be of use to you.  I think I can prove that the
     poison acts so quickly that the man was dead before ever you reached
     the room."

     "That he was, sir. I never got such a turn in my life as when I saw
     him grinning at me with his head on his shoulder as I climbed through
     the window. It fairly shook me, sir. I'd have half killed Tonga for
     it if he had not scrambled off. That was how he came to leave his
     club, and some of his darts too, as he tells me, which I dare say
     helped to put you on our track; though how you kept on it is more
     than I can tell. I don't feel no malice against you for it. But it
     does seem a queer thing," he added, with a bitter smile, "that I who
     have a fair claim to nigh upon half a million of money should spend
     the first half of my life building a breakwater in the Andamans, and
     am like to spend the other half digging drains at Dartmoor. It was an
     evil day for me when first I clapped eyes upon the merchant Achmet
     and had to do with the Agra treasure, which never brought anything
     but a curse yet upon the man who owned it. To him it brought murder,
     to Major Sholto it brought fear and guilt, to me it has meant slavery
     for life."

     At this moment Athelney Jones thrust his broad face and heavy
     shoulders into the tiny cabin. "Quite a family party," he remarked.
     "I think I shall have a pull at that flask, Holmes.  Well, I think we
     may all congratulate each other. Pity we didn't take the other alive;
     but there was no choice. I say, Holmes, you must confess that you cut
     it rather fine. It was all we could do to overhaul her."

     "All is well that ends well," said Holmes. "But I certainly did not
     know that the Aurora was such a clipper."

     "Smith says she is one of the fastest launches on the river, and that
     if he had had another man to help him with the engines we should
     never have caught her. He swears he knew nothing of this Norwood
     business."

     "Neither he did," cried our prisoner,--"not a word. I chose his
     launch because I heard that she was a flier. We told him nothing, but
     we paid him well, and he was to get something handsome if we reached
     our vessel, the Esmeralda, at Gravesend, outward bound for the
     Brazils."

     "Well, if he has done no wrong we shall see that no wrong comes to
     him. If we are pretty quick in catching our men, we are not so quick
     in condemning them." It was amusing to notice how the consequential
     Jones was already beginning to give himself airs on the strength of
     the capture. From the slight smile which played over Sherlock
     Holmes's face, I could see that the speech had not been lost upon
     him.

     "We will be at Vauxhall Bridge presently," said Jones, "and shall
     land you, Dr. Watson, with the treasure-box. I need hardly tell you
     that I am taking a very grave responsibility upon myself in doing
     this. It is most irregular; but of course an agreement is an
     agreement. I must, however, as a matter of duty, send an inspector
     with you, since you have so valuable a charge. You will drive, no
     doubt?"

     "Yes, I shall drive."

     "It is a pity there is no key, that we may make an inventory first.
     You will have to break it open. Where is the key, my man?"

     "At the bottom of the river," said Small, shortly.

     "Hum! There was no use your giving this unnecessary trouble. We have
     had work enough already through you. However, doctor, I need not warn
     you to be careful. Bring the box back with you to the Baker Street
     rooms. You will find us there, on our way to the station."

     They landed me at Vauxhall, with my heavy iron box, and with a bluff,
     genial inspector as my companion. A quarter of an hour's drive
     brought us to Mrs. Cecil Forrester's. The servant seemed surprised at
     so late a visitor. Mrs. Cecil Forrester was out for the evening, she
     explained, and likely to be very late. Miss Morstan, however, was in
     the drawing-room: so to the drawing-room I went, box in hand, leaving
     the obliging inspector in the cab.

     She was seated by the open window, dressed in some sort of white
     diaphanous material, with a little touch of scarlet at the neck and
     waist. The soft light of a shaded lamp fell upon her as she leaned
     back in the basket chair, playing over her sweet, grave face, and
     tinting with a dull, metallic sparkle the rich coils of her luxuriant
     hair. One white arm and hand drooped over the side of the chair, and
     her whole pose and figure spoke of an absorbing melancholy. At the
     sound of my foot-fall she sprang to her feet, however, and a bright
     flush of surprise and of pleasure colored her pale cheeks.

     "I heard a cab drive up," she said. "I thought that Mrs. Forrester
     had come back very early, but I never dreamed that it might be you.
     What news have you brought me?"

     "I have brought something better than news," said I, putting down the
     box upon the table and speaking jovially and boisterously, though my
     heart was heavy within me. "I have brought you something which is
     worth all the news in the world. I have brought you a fortune."

     She glanced at iron box. "Is that the treasure, then?" she asked,
     coolly enough.

     "Yes, this is the great Agra treasure. Half of it is yours and half
     is Thaddeus Sholto's. You will have a couple of hundred thousand
     each. Think of that! An annuity of ten thousand pounds. There will be
     few richer young ladies in England. Is it not glorious?"

     I think that I must have been rather overacting my delight, and that
     she detected a hollow ring in my congratulations, for I saw her
     eyebrows rise a little, and she glanced at me curiously.

     "If I have it," said she, "I owe it to you."

     "No, no," I answered, "not to me, but to my friend Sherlock Holmes.
     With all the will in the world, I could never have followed up a clue
     which has taxed even his analytical genius.  As it was, we very
     nearly lost it at the last moment."

     "Pray sit down and tell me all about it, Dr. Watson," said she.

     I narrated briefly what had occurred since I had seen her
     last,--Holmes's new method of search, the discovery of the Aurora,
     the appearance of Athelney Jones, our expedition in the evening, and
     the wild chase down the Thames. She listened with parted lips and
     shining eyes to my recital of our adventures. When I spoke of the
     dart which had so narrowly missed us, she turned so white that I
     feared that she was about to faint.

     "It is nothing," she said, as I hastened to pour her out some water.
     "I am all right again. It was a shock to me to hear that I had placed
     my friends in such horrible peril."

     "That is all over," I answered. "It was nothing. I will tell you no
     more gloomy details. Let us turn to something brighter. There is the
     treasure. What could be brighter than that? I got leave to bring it
     with me, thinking that it would interest you to be the first to see
     it."

     "It would be of the greatest interest to me," she said. There was no
     eagerness in her voice, however. It had struck her, doubtless, that
     it might seem ungracious upon her part to be indifferent to a prize
     which had cost so much to win.

     "What a pretty box!" she said, stooping over it. "This is Indian
     work, I suppose?"

     "Yes; it is Benares metal-work."

     "And so heavy!" she exclaimed, trying to raise it. "The box alone
     must be of some value. Where is the key?"

     "Small threw it into the Thames," I answered. "I must borrow Mrs.
     Forrester's poker." There was in the front a thick and broad hasp,
     wrought in the image of a sitting Buddha. Under this I thrust the end
     of the poker and twisted it outward as a lever. The hasp sprang open
     with a loud snap. With trembling fingers I flung back the lid. We
     both stood gazing in astonishment. The box was empty!

     No wonder that it was heavy. The iron-work was two-thirds of an inch
     thick all round. It was massive, well made, and solid, like a chest
     constructed to carry things of great price, but not one shred or
     crumb of metal or jewelry lay within it. It was absolutely and
     completely empty.

     "The treasure is lost," said Miss Morstan, calmly.

     As I listened to the words and realized what they meant, a great
     shadow seemed to pass from my soul. I did not know how this Agra
     treasure had weighed me down, until now that it was finally removed.
     It was selfish, no doubt, disloyal, wrong, but I could realize
     nothing save that the golden barrier was gone from between us. "Thank
     God!" I ejaculated from my very heart.

     She looked at me with a quick, questioning smile. "Why do you say
     that?" she asked.

     "Because you are within my reach again," I said, taking her hand. She
     did not withdraw it. "Because I love you, Mary, as truly as ever a
     man loved a woman. Because this treasure, these riches, sealed my
     lips. Now that they are gone I can tell you how I love you. That is
     why I said, 'Thank God.'"

     "Then I say, 'Thank God,' too," she whispered, as I drew her to my
     side. Whoever had lost a treasure, I knew that night that I had
     gained one.





          CHAPTER XII
          The Strange Story of Jonathan Small


     A very patient man was that inspector in the cab, for it was a weary
     time before I rejoined him. His face clouded over when I showed him
     the empty box.

     "There goes the reward!" said he, gloomily. "Where there is no money
     there is no pay. This night's work would have been worth a tenner
     each to Sam Brown and me if the treasure had been there."

     "Mr. Thaddeus Sholto is a rich man," I said. "He will see that you
     are rewarded, treasure or no."

     The inspector shook his head despondently, however. "It's a bad job,"
     he repeated; "and so Mr. Athelney Jones will think."

     His forecast proved to be correct, for the detective looked blank
     enough when I got to Baker Street and showed him the empty box. They
     had only just arrived, Holmes, the prisoner, and he, for they had
     changed their plans so far as to report themselves at a station upon
     the way. My companion lounged in his arm-chair with his usual
     listless expression, while Small sat stolidly opposite to him with
     his wooden leg cocked over his sound one. As I exhibited the empty
     box he leaned back in his chair and laughed aloud.

     "This is your doing, Small," said Athelney Jones, angrily.

     "Yes, I have put it away where you shall never lay hand upon it," he
     cried, exultantly. "It is my treasure; and if I can't have the loot
     I'll take darned good care that no one else does. I tell you that no
     living man has any right to it, unless it is three men who are in the
     Andaman convict-barracks and myself. I know now that I cannot have
     the use of it, and I know that they cannot. I have acted all through
     for them as much as for myself. It's been the sign of four with us
     always. Well I know that they would have had me do just what I have
     done, and throw the treasure into the Thames rather than let it go to
     kith or kin of Sholto or of Morstan. It was not to make them rich
     that we did for Achmet. You'll find the treasure where the key is,
     and where little Tonga is. When I saw that your launch must catch us,
     I put the loot away in a safe place. There are no rupees for you this
     journey."

     "You are deceiving us, Small," said Athelney Jones, sternly. "If you
     had wished to throw the treasure into the Thames it would have been
     easier for you to have thrown box and all."

     "Easier for me to throw, and easier for you to recover," he answered,
     with a shrewd, sidelong look. "The man that was clever enough to hunt
     me down is clever enough to pick an iron box from the bottom of a
     river. Now that they are scattered over five miles or so, it may be a
     harder job. It went to my heart to do it, though. I was half mad when
     you came up with us. However, there's no good grieving over it. I've
     had ups in my life, and I've had downs, but I've learned not to cry
     over spilled milk."

     "This is a very serious matter, Small," said the detective. "If you
     had helped justice, instead of thwarting it in this way, you would
     have had a better chance at your trial."

     "Justice!" snarled the ex-convict. "A pretty justice! Whose loot is
     this, if it is not ours? Where is the justice that I should give it
     up to those who have never earned it? Look how I have earned it!
     Twenty long years in that fever-ridden swamp, all day at work under
     the mangrove-tree, all night chained up in the filthy convict-huts,
     bitten by mosquitoes, racked with ague, bullied by every cursed
     black-faced policeman who loved to take it out of a white man. That
     was how I earned the Agra treasure; and you talk to me of justice
     because I cannot bear to feel that I have paid this price only that
     another may enjoy it! I would rather swing a score of times, or have
     one of Tonga's darts in my hide, than live in a convict's cell and
     feel that another man is at his ease in a palace with the money that
     should be mine." Small had dropped his mask of stoicism, and all this
     came out in a wild whirl of words, while his eyes blazed, and the
     handcuffs clanked together with the impassioned movement of his
     hands. I could understand, as I saw the fury and the passion of the
     man, that it was no groundless or unnatural terror which had
     possessed Major Sholto when he first learned that the injured convict
     was upon his track.

     "You forget that we know nothing of all this," said Holmes quietly.
     "We have not heard your story, and we cannot tell how far justice may
     originally have been on your side."

     "Well, sir, you have been very fair-spoken to me, though I can see
     that I have you to thank that I have these bracelets upon my wrists.
     Still, I bear no grudge for that. It is all fair and above-board. If
     you want to hear my story I have no wish to hold it back. What I say
     to you is God's truth, every word of it. Thank you; you can put the
     glass beside me here, and I'll put my lips to it if I am dry.

     "I am a Worcestershire man myself,--born near Pershore. I dare say
     you would find a heap of Smalls living there now if you were to look.
     I have often thought of taking a look round there, but the truth is
     that I was never much of a credit to the family, and I doubt if they
     would be so very glad to see me. They were all steady, chapel-going
     folk, small farmers, well known and respected over the country-side,
     while I was always a bit of a rover. At last, however, when I was
     about eighteen, I gave them no more trouble, for I got into a mess
     over a girl, and could only get out of it again by taking the queen's
     shilling and joining the 3d Buffs, which was just starting for India.

     "I wasn't destined to do much soldiering, however. I had just got
     past the goose-step, and learned to handle my musket, when I was fool
     enough to go swimming in the Ganges. Luckily for me, my company
     sergeant, John Holder, was in the water at the same time, and he was
     one of the finest swimmers in the service. A crocodile took me, just
     as I was half-way across, and nipped off my right leg as clean as a
     surgeon could have done it, just above the knee. What with the shock
     and the loss of blood, I fainted, and should have drowned if Holder
     had not caught hold of me and paddled for the bank. I was five months
     in hospital over it, and when at last I was able to limp out of it
     with this timber toe strapped to my stump I found myself invalided
     out of the army and unfitted for any active occupation.

     "I was, as you can imagine, pretty down on my luck at this time, for
     I was a useless cripple though not yet in my twentieth year. However,
     my misfortune soon proved to be a blessing in disguise. A man named
     Abelwhite, who had come out there as an indigo-planter, wanted an
     overseer to look after his coolies and keep them up to their work. He
     happened to be a friend of our colonel's, who had taken an interest
     in me since the accident. To make a long story short, the colonel
     recommended me strongly for the post and, as the work was mostly to
     be done on horseback, my leg was no great obstacle, for I had enough
     knee left to keep good grip on the saddle. What I had to do was to
     ride over the plantation, to keep an eye on the men as they worked,
     and to report the idlers. The pay was fair, I had comfortable
     quarters, and altogether I was content to spend the remainder of my
     life in indigo-planting. Mr. Abelwhite was a kind man, and he would
     often drop into my little shanty and smoke a pipe with me, for white
     folk out there feel their hearts warm to each other as they never do
     here at home.

     "Well, I was never in luck's way long. Suddenly, without a note of
     warning, the great mutiny broke upon us. One month India lay as still
     and peaceful, to all appearance, as Surrey or Kent; the next there
     were two hundred thousand black devils let loose, and the country was
     a perfect hell. Of course you know all about it, gentlemen,--a deal
     more than I do, very like, since reading is not in my line. I only
     know what I saw with my own eyes. Our plantation was at a place
     called Muttra, near the border of the Northwest Provinces. Night
     after night the whole sky was alight with the burning bungalows, and
     day after day we had small companies of Europeans passing through our
     estate with their wives and children, on their way to Agra, where
     were the nearest troops. Mr. Abelwhite was an obstinate man. He had
     it in his head that the affair had been exaggerated, and that it
     would blow over as suddenly as it had sprung up. There he sat on his
     veranda, drinking whiskey-pegs and smoking cheroots, while the
     country was in a blaze about him. Of course we stuck by him, I and
     Dawson, who, with his wife, used to do the book-work and the
     managing. Well, one fine day the crash came. I had been away on a
     distant plantation, and was riding slowly home in the evening, when
     my eye fell upon something all huddled together at the bottom of a
     steep nullah. I rode down to see what it was, and the cold struck
     through my heart when I found it was Dawson's wife, all cut into
     ribbons, and half eaten by jackals and native dogs. A little further
     up the road Dawson himself was lying on his face, quite dead, with an
     empty revolver in his hand and four Sepoys lying across each other in
     front of him. I reined up my horse, wondering which way I should
     turn, but at that moment I saw thick smoke curling up from
     Abelwhite's bungalow and the flames beginning to burst through the
     roof. I knew then that I could do my employer no good, but would only
     throw my own life away if I meddled in the matter. From where I stood
     I could see hundreds of the black fiends, with their red coats still
     on their backs, dancing and howling round the burning house. Some of
     them pointed at me, and a couple of bullets sang past my head; so I
     broke away across the paddy-fields, and found myself late at night
     safe within the walls at Agra.

     "As it proved, however, there was no great safety there, either. The
     whole country was up like a swarm of bees. Wherever the English could
     collect in little bands they held just the ground that their guns
     commanded. Everywhere else they were helpless fugitives. It was a
     fight of the millions against the hundreds; and the cruellest part of
     it was that these men that we fought against, foot, horse, and
     gunners, were our own picked troops, whom we had taught and trained,
     handling our own weapons, and blowing our own bugle-calls. At Agra
     there were the 3d Bengal Fusiliers, some Sikhs, two troops of horse,
     and a battery of artillery. A volunteer corps of clerks and merchants
     had been formed, and this I joined, wooden leg and all. We went out
     to meet the rebels at Shahgunge early in July, and we beat them back
     for a time, but our powder gave out, and we had to fall back upon the
     city. Nothing but the worst news came to us from every side,--which
     is not to be wondered at, for if you look at the map you will see
     that we were right in the heart of it. Lucknow is rather better than
     a hundred miles to the east, and Cawnpore about as far to the south.
     From every point on the compass there was nothing but torture and
     murder and outrage.

     "The city of Agra is a great place, swarming with fanatics and fierce
     devil-worshippers of all sorts. Our handful of men were lost among
     the narrow, winding streets. Our leader moved across the river,
     therefore, and took up his position in the old fort at Agra. I don't
     know if any of you gentlemen have ever read or heard anything of that
     old fort. It is a very queer place,--the queerest that ever I was in,
     and I have been in some rum corners, too. First of all, it is
     enormous in size. I should think that the enclosure must be acres and
     acres. There is a modern part, which took all our garrison, women,
     children, stores, and everything else, with plenty of room over. But
     the modern part is nothing like the size of the old quarter, where
     nobody goes, and which is given over to the scorpions and the
     centipedes. It is all full of great deserted halls, and winding
     passages, and long corridors twisting in and out, so that it is easy
     enough for folk to get lost in it. For this reason it was seldom that
     any one went into it, though now and again a party with torches might
     go exploring.

     "The river washes along the front of the old fort, and so protects
     it, but on the sides and behind there are many doors, and these had
     to be guarded, of course, in the old quarter as well as in that which
     was actually held by our troops. We were short-handed, with hardly
     men enough to man the angles of the building and to serve the guns.
     It was impossible for us, therefore, to station a strong guard at
     every one of the innumerable gates. What we did was to organize a
     central guard-house in the middle of the fort, and to leave each gate
     under the charge of one white man and two or three natives. I was
     selected to take charge during certain hours of the night of a small
     isolated door upon the southwest side of the building. Two Sikh
     troopers were placed under my command, and I was instructed if
     anything went wrong to fire my musket, when I might rely upon help
     coming at once from the central guard. As the guard was a good two
     hundred paces away, however, and as the space between was cut up into
     a labyrinth of passages and corridors, I had great doubts as to
     whether they could arrive in time to be of any use in case of an
     actual attack.

     "Well, I was pretty proud at having this small command given me,
     since I was a raw recruit, and a game-legged one at that. For two
     nights I kept the watch with my Punjaubees. They were tall,
     fierce-looking chaps, Mahomet Singh and Abdullah Khan by name, both
     old fighting-men who had borne arms against us at Chilian-wallah.
     They could talk English pretty well, but I could get little out of
     them. They preferred to stand together and jabber all night in their
     queer Sikh lingo. For myself, I used to stand outside the gate-way,
     looking down on the broad, winding river and on the twinkling lights
     of the great city. The beating of drums, the rattle of tomtoms, and
     the yells and howls of the rebels, drunk with opium and with bang,
     were enough to remind us all night of our dangerous neighbors across
     the stream. Every two hours the officer of the night used to come
     round to all the posts, to make sure that all was well.

     "The third night of my watch was dark and dirty, with a small,
     driving rain. It was dreary work standing in the gate-way hour after
     hour in such weather. I tried again and again to make my Sikhs talk,
     but without much success. At two in the morning the rounds passed,
     and broke for a moment the weariness of the night. Finding that my
     companions would not be led into conversation, I took out my pipe,
     and laid down my musket to strike the match. In an instant the two
     Sikhs were upon me. One of them snatched my firelock up and levelled
     it at my head, while the other held a great knife to my throat and
     swore between his teeth that he would plunge it into me if I moved a
     step.

     "My first thought was that these fellows were in league with the
     rebels, and that this was the beginning of an assault. If our door
     were in the hands of the Sepoys the place must fall, and the women
     and children be treated as they were in Cawnpore. Maybe you gentlemen
     think that I am just making out a case for myself, but I give you my
     word that when I thought of that, though I felt the point of the
     knife at my throat, I opened my mouth with the intention of giving a
     scream, if it was my last one, which might alarm the main guard. The
     man who held me seemed to know my thoughts; for, even as I braced
     myself to it, he whispered, 'Don't make a noise. The fort is safe
     enough. There are no rebel dogs on this side of the river.' There was
     the ring of truth in what he said, and I knew that if I raised my
     voice I was a dead man. I could read it in the fellow's brown eyes. I
     waited, therefore, in silence, to see what it was that they wanted
     from me.

     "'Listen to me, Sahib,' said the taller and fiercer of the pair, the
     one whom they called Abdullah Khan. 'You must either be with us now
     or you must be silenced forever. The thing is too great a one for us
     to hesitate. Either you are heart and soul with us on your oath on
     the cross of the Christians, or your body this night shall be thrown
     into the ditch and we shall pass over to our brothers in the rebel
     army. There is no middle way. Which is it to be, death or life? We
     can only give you three minutes to decide, for the time is passing,
     and all must be done before the rounds come again.'

     "'How can I decide?' said I. 'You have not told me what you want of
     me. But I tell you know that if it is anything against the safety of
     the fort I will have no truck with it, so you can drive home your
     knife and welcome.'

     "'It is nothing against the fort,' said he. 'We only ask you to do
     that which your countrymen come to this land for. We ask you to be
     rich. If you will be one of us this night, we will swear to you upon
     the naked knife, and by the threefold oath which no Sikh was ever
     known to break, that you shall have your fair share of the loot. A
     quarter of the treasure shall be yours. We can say no fairer.'

     "'But what is the treasure, then?' I asked. 'I am as ready to be rich
     as you can be, if you will but show me how it can be done.'

     "'You will swear, then,' said he, 'by the bones of your father, by
     the honor of your mother, by the cross of your faith, to raise no
     hand and speak no word against us, either now or afterwards?'

     "'I will swear it,' I answered, 'provided that the fort is not
     endangered.'

     "'Then my comrade and I will swear that you shall have a quarter of
     the treasure which shall be equally divided among the four of us.'

     "'There are but three,' said I.

     "'No; Dost Akbar must have his share. We can tell the tale to you
     while we await them. Do you stand at the gate, Mahomet Singh, and
     give notice of their coming. The thing stands thus, Sahib, and I tell
     it to you because I know that an oath is binding upon a Feringhee,
     and that we may trust you. Had you been a lying Hindoo, though you
     had sworn by all the gods in their false temples, your blood would
     have been upon the knife, and your body in the water. But the Sikh
     knows the Englishman, and the Englishman knows the Sikh. Hearken,
     then, to what I have to say.

     "'There is a rajah in the northern provinces who has much wealth,
     though his lands are small. Much has come to him from his father, and
     more still he has set by himself, for he is of a low nature and
     hoards his gold rather than spend it. When the troubles broke out he
     would be friends both with the lion and the tiger,--with the Sepoy
     and with the Company's raj. Soon, however, it seemed to him that the
     white men's day was come, for through all the land he could hear of
     nothing but of their death and their overthrow. Yet, being a careful
     man, he made such plans that, come what might, half at least of his
     treasure should be left to him. That which was in gold and silver he
     kept by him in the vaults of his palace, but the most precious stones
     and the choicest pearls that he had he put in an iron box, and sent
     it by a trusty servant who, under the guise of a merchant, should
     take it to the fort at Agra, there to lie until the land is at peace.
     Thus, if the rebels won he would have his money, but if the Company
     conquered his jewels would be saved to him. Having thus divided his
     hoard, he threw himself into the cause of the Sepoys, since they were
     strong upon his borders. By doing this, mark you, Sahib, his property
     becomes the due of those who have been true to their salt.

     "'This pretended merchant, who travels under the name of Achmet, is
     now in the city of Agra, and desires to gain his way into the fort.
     He has with him as travelling-companion my foster-brother Dost Akbar,
     who knows his secret. Dost Akbar has promised this night to lead him
     to a side-postern of the fort, and has chosen this one for his
     purpose. Here he will come presently, and here he will find Mahomet
     Singh and myself awaiting him. The place is lonely, and none shall
     know of his coming. The world shall know of the merchant Achmet no
     more, but the great treasure of the rajah shall be divided among us.
     What say you to it, Sahib?'

     "In Worcestershire the life of a man seems a great and a sacred
     thing; but it is very different when there is fire and blood all
     round you and you have been used to meeting death at every turn.
     Whether Achmet the merchant lived or died was a thing as light as air
     to me, but at the talk about the treasure my heart turned to it, and
     I thought of what I might do in the old country with it, and how my
     folk would stare when they saw their ne'er-do-well coming back with
     his pockets full of gold moidores. I had, therefore, already made up
     my mind. Abdullah Khan, however, thinking that I hesitated, pressed
     the matter more closely.

     "'Consider, Sahib,' said he, 'that if this man is taken by the
     commandant he will be hung or shot, and his jewels taken by the
     government, so that no man will be a rupee the better for them. Now,
     since we do the taking of him, why should we not do the rest as well?
     The jewels will be as well with us as in the Company's coffers. There
     will be enough to make every one of us rich men and great chiefs. No
     one can know about the matter, for here we are cut off from all men.
     What could be better for the purpose?  Say again, then, Sahib,
     whether you are with us, or if we must look upon you as an enemy.'

     "'I am with you heart and soul,' said I.

     "'It is well,' he answered, handing me back my firelock. 'You see
     that we trust you, for your word, like ours, is not to be broken. We
     have now only to wait for my brother and the merchant.'

     "'Does your brother know, then, of what you will do?' I asked.

     "'The plan is his. He has devised it. We will go to the gate and
     share the watch with Mahomet Singh.'

     "The rain was still falling steadily, for it was just the beginning
     of the wet season. Brown, heavy clouds were drifting across the sky,
     and it was hard to see more than a stone-cast. A deep moat lay in
     front of our door, but the water was in places nearly dried up, and
     it could easily be crossed. It was strange to me to be standing there
     with those two wild Punjaubees waiting for the man who was coming to
     his death.

     "Suddenly my eye caught the glint of a shaded lantern at the other
     side of the moat. It vanished among the mound-heaps, and then
     appeared again coming slowly in our direction.

     "'Here they are!' I exclaimed.

     "'You will challenge him, Sahib, as usual,' whispered Abdullah. 'Give
     him no cause for fear. Send us in with him, and we shall do the rest
     while you stay here on guard. Have the lantern ready to uncover, that
     we may be sure that it is indeed the man.'

     "The light had flickered onwards, now stopping and now advancing,
     until I could see two dark figures upon the other side of the moat. I
     let them scramble down the sloping bank, splash through the mire, and
     climb half-way up to the gate, before I challenged them.

     "'Who goes there?' said I, in a subdued voice.

     "'Friends,' came the answer. I uncovered my lantern and threw a flood
     of light upon them. The first was an enormous Sikh, with a black
     beard which swept nearly down to his cummerbund. Outside of a show I
     have never seen so tall a man. The other was a little, fat, round
     fellow, with a great yellow turban, and a bundle in his hand, done up
     in a shawl. He seemed to be all in a quiver with fear, for his hands
     twitched as if he had the ague, and his head kept turning to left and
     right with two bright little twinkling eyes, like a mouse when he
     ventures out from his hole. It gave me the chills to think of killing
     him, but I thought of the treasure, and my heart set as hard as a
     flint within me. When he saw my white face he gave a little chirrup
     of joy and came running up towards me.

     "'Your protection, Sahib,' he panted,--'your protection for the
     unhappy merchant Achmet. I have travelled across Rajpootana that I
     might seek the shelter of the fort at Agra. I have been robbed and
     beaten and abused because I have been the friend of the Company. It
     is a blessed night this when I am once more in safety,--I and my poor
     possessions.'

     "'What have you in the bundle?' I asked.

     "'An iron box,' he answered, 'which contains one or two little family
     matters which are of no value to others, but which I should be sorry
     to lose. Yet I am not a beggar; and I shall reward you, young Sahib,
     and your governor also, if he will give me the shelter I ask.'

     "I could not trust myself to speak longer with the man. The more I
     looked at his fat, frightened face, the harder did it seem that we
     should slay him in cold blood. It was best to get it over.

     "'Take him to the main guard,' said I. The two Sikhs closed in upon
     him on each side, and the giant walked behind, while they marched in
     through the dark gate-way. Never was a man so compassed round with
     death. I remained at the gate-way with the lantern.

     "I could hear the measured tramp of their footsteps sounding through
     the lonely corridors. Suddenly it ceased, and I heard voices, and a
     scuffle, with the sound of blows. A moment later there came, to my
     horror, a rush of footsteps coming in my direction, with the loud
     breathing of a running man. I turned my lantern down the long,
     straight passage, and there was the fat man, running like the wind,
     with a smear of blood across his face, and close at his heels,
     bounding like a tiger, the great black-bearded Sikh, with a knife
     flashing in his hand. I have never seen a man run so fast as that
     little merchant. He was gaining on the Sikh, and I could see that if
     he once passed me and got to the open air he would save himself yet.
     My heart softened to him, but again the thought of his treasure
     turned me hard and bitter. I cast my firelock between his legs as he
     raced past, and he rolled twice over like a shot rabbit. Ere he could
     stagger to his feet the Sikh was upon him, and buried his knife twice
     in his side. The man never uttered moan nor moved muscle, but lay
     were he had fallen. I think myself that he may have broken his neck
     with the fall. You see, gentlemen, that I am keeping my promise. I am
     telling you every work of the business just exactly as it happened,
     whether it is in my favor or not."

     He stopped, and held out his manacled hands for the whiskey-and-water
     which Holmes had brewed for him. For myself, I confess that I had now
     conceived the utmost horror of the man, not only for this
     cold-blooded business in which he had been concerned, but even more
     for the somewhat flippant and careless way in which he narrated it.
     Whatever punishment was in store for him, I felt that he might expect
     no sympathy from me. Sherlock Holmes and Jones sat with their hands
     upon their knees, deeply interested in the story, but with the same
     disgust written upon their faces.  He may have observed it, for there
     was a touch of defiance in his voice and manner as he proceeded.

     "It was all very bad, no doubt," said he. "I should like to know how
     many fellows in my shoes would have refused a share of this loot when
     they knew that they would have their throats cut for their pains.
     Besides, it was my life or his when once he was in the fort. If he
     had got out, the whole business would come to light, and I should
     have been court-martialled and shot as likely as not; for people were
     not very lenient at a time like that."

     "Go on with your story," said Holmes, shortly.

     "Well, we carried him in, Abdullah, Akbar, and I. A fine weight he
     was, too, for all that he was so short. Mahomet Singh was left to
     guard the door. We took him to a place which the Sikhs had already
     prepared. It was some distance off, where a winding passage leads to
     a great empty hall, the brick walls of which were all crumbling to
     pieces. The earth floor had sunk in at one place, making a natural
     grave, so we left Achmet the merchant there, having first covered him
     over with loose bricks. This done, we all went back to the treasure.

     "It lay where he had dropped it when he was first attacked. The box
     was the same which now lies open upon your table. A key was hung by a
     silken cord to that carved handle upon the top. We opened it, and the
     light of the lantern gleamed upon a collection of gems such as I have
     read of and thought about when I was a little lad at Pershore. It was
     blinding to look upon them. When we had feasted our eyes we took them
     all out and made a list of them. There were one hundred and
     forty-three diamonds of the first water, including one which has been
     called, I believe, 'the Great Mogul' and is said to be the second
     largest stone in existence. Then there were ninety-seven very fine
     emeralds, and one hundred and seventy rubies, some of which, however,
     were small. There were forty carbuncles, two hundred and ten
     sapphires, sixty-one agates, and a great quantity of beryls, onyxes,
     cats'-eyes, turquoises, and other stones, the very names of which I
     did not know at the time, though I have become more familiar with
     them since. Besides this, there were nearly three hundred very fine
     pearls, twelve of which were set in a gold coronet. By the way, these
     last had been taken out of the chest and were not there when I
     recovered it.

     "After we had counted our treasures we put them back into the chest
     and carried them to the gate-way to show them to Mahomet Singh. Then
     we solemnly renewed our oath to stand by each other and be true to
     our secret. We agreed to conceal our loot in a safe place until the
     country should be at peace again, and then to divide it equally among
     ourselves. There was no use dividing it at present, for if gems of
     such value were found upon us it would cause suspicion, and there was
     no privacy in the fort nor any place where we could keep them. We
     carried the box, therefore, into the same hall where we had buried
     the body, and there, under certain bricks in the best-preserved wall,
     we made a hollow and put our treasure. We made careful note of the
     place, and next day I drew four plans, one for each of us, and put
     the sign of the four of us at the bottom, for we had sworn that we
     should each always act for all, so that none might take advantage.
     That is an oath that I can put my hand to my heart and swear that I
     have never broken.

     "Well, there's no use my telling you gentlemen what came of the
     Indian mutiny. After Wilson took Delhi and Sir Colin relieved Lucknow
     the back of the business was broken. Fresh troops came pouring in,
     and Nana Sahib made himself scarce over the frontier. A flying column
     under Colonel Greathed came round to Agra and cleared the Pandies
     away from it. Peace seemed to be settling upon the country, and we
     four were beginning to hope that the time was at hand when we might
     safely go off with our shares of the plunder. In a moment, however,
     our hopes were shattered by our being arrested as the murderers of
     Achmet.

     "It came about in this way. When the rajah put his jewels into the
     hands of Achmet he did it because he knew that he was a trusty man.
     They are suspicious folk in the East, however: so what does this
     rajah do but take a second even more trusty servant and set him to
     play the spy upon the first? This second man was ordered never to let
     Achmet out of his sight, and he followed him like his shadow. He went
     after him that night and saw him pass through the doorway. Of course
     he thought he had taken refuge in the fort, and applied for admission
     there himself next day, but could find no trace of Achmet. This
     seemed to him so strange that he spoke about it to a sergeant of
     guides, who brought it to the ears of the commandant. A thorough
     search was quickly made, and the body was discovered. Thus at the
     very moment that we thought that all was safe we were all four seized
     and brought to trial on a charge of murder,--three of us because we
     had held the gate that night, and the fourth because he was known to
     have been in the company of the murdered man. Not a word about the
     jewels came out at the trial, for the rajah had been deposed and
     driven out of India: so no one had any particular interest in them.
     The murder, however, was clearly made out, and it was certain that we
     must all have been concerned in it. The three Sikhs got penal
     servitude for life, and I was condemned to death, though my sentence
     was afterwards commuted into the same as the others.

     "It was rather a queer position that we found ourselves in then.
     There we were all four tied by the leg and with precious little
     chance of ever getting out again, while we each held a secret which
     might have put each of us in a palace if we could only have made use
     of it. It was enough to make a man eat his heart out to have to stand
     the kick and the cuff of every petty jack-in-office, to have rice to
     eat and water to drink, when that gorgeous fortune was ready for him
     outside, just waiting to be picked up. It might have driven me mad;
     but I was always a pretty stubborn one, so I just held on and bided
     my time.

     "At last it seemed to me to have come. I was changed from Agra to
     Madras, and from there to Blair Island in the Andamans. There are
     very few white convicts at this settlement, and, as I had behaved
     well from the first, I soon found myself a sort of privileged person.
     I was given a hut in Hope Town, which is a small place on the slopes
     of Mount Harriet, and I was left pretty much to myself. It is a
     dreary, fever-stricken place, and all beyond our little clearings was
     infested with wild cannibal natives, who were ready enough to blow a
     poisoned dart at us if they saw a chance. There was digging, and
     ditching, and yam-planting, and a dozen other things to be done, so
     we were busy enough all day; though in the evening we had a little
     time to ourselves. Among other things, I learned to dispense drugs
     for the surgeon, and picked up a smattering of his knowledge. All the
     time I was on the lookout for a chance of escape; but it is hundreds
     of miles from any other land, and there is little or no wind in those
     seas: so it was a terribly difficult job to get away.

     "The surgeon, Dr. Somerton, was a fast, sporting young chap, and the
     other young officers would meet in his rooms of an evening and play
     cards. The surgery, where I used to make up my drugs, was next to his
     sitting-room, with a small window between us. Often, if I felt
     lonesome, I used to turn out the lamp in the surgery, and then,
     standing there, I could hear their talk and watch their play. I am
     fond of a hand at cards myself, and it was almost as good as having
     one to watch the others. There was Major Sholto, Captain Morstan, and
     Lieutenant Bromley Brown, who were in command of the native troops,
     and there was the surgeon himself, and two or three prison-officials,
     crafty old hands who played a nice sly safe game. A very snug little
     party they used to make.

     "Well, there was one thing which very soon struck me, and that was
     that the soldiers used always to lose and the civilians to win. Mind,
     I don't say that there was anything unfair, but so it was. These
     prison-chaps had done little else than play cards ever since they had
     been at the Andamans, and they knew each other's game to a point,
     while the others just played to pass the time and threw their cards
     down anyhow. Night after night the soldiers got up poorer men, and
     the poorer they got the more keen they were to play. Major Sholto was
     the hardest hit. He used to pay in notes and gold at first, but soon
     it came to notes of hand and for big sums. He sometimes would win for
     a few deals, just to give him heart, and then the luck would set in
     against him worse than ever. All day he would wander about as black
     as thunder, and he took to drinking a deal more than was good for
     him.

     "One night he lost even more heavily than usual. I was sitting in my
     hut when he and Captain Morstan came stumbling along on the way to
     their quarters. They were bosom friends, those two, and never far
     apart. The major was raving about his losses.

     "'It's all up, Morstan,' he was saying, as they passed my hut. 'I
     shall have to send in my papers. I am a ruined man.'

     "'Nonsense, old chap!' said the other, slapping him upon the
     shoulder. 'I've had a nasty facer myself, but--' That was all I could
     hear, but it was enough to set me thinking.

     A couple of days later Major Sholto was strolling on the beach: so I
     took the chance of speaking to him.

     "'I wish to have your advice, major,' said I.

     "'Well, Small, what is it?' he asked, taking his cheroot from his
     lips.

     "'I wanted to ask you, sir,' said I, 'who is the proper person to
     whom hidden treasure should be handed over. I know where half a
     million worth lies, and, as I cannot use it myself, I thought perhaps
     the best thing that I could do would be to hand it over to the proper
     authorities, and then perhaps they would get my sentence shortened
     for me.'

     "'Half a million, Small?' he gasped, looking hard at me to see if I
     was in earnest.

     "'Quite that, sir,--in jewels and pearls. It lies there ready for
     anyone. And the queer thing about it is that the real owner is
     outlawed and cannot hold property, so that it belongs to the first
     comer.'

     "'To government, Small,' he stammered,--'to government.' But he said
     it in a halting fashion, and I knew in my heart that I had got him.

     "'You think, then, sir, that I should give the information to the
     Governor-General?' said I, quietly.

     "'Well, well, you must not do anything rash, or that you might
     repent. Let me hear all about it, Small. Give me the facts.'

     "I told him the whole story, with small changes so that he could not
     identify the places. When I had finished he stood stock still and
     full of thought. I could see by the twitch of his lip that there was
     a struggle going on within him.

     "'This is a very important matter, Small,' he said, at last. 'You
     must not say a word to any one about it, and I shall see you again
     soon.'

     "Two nights later he and his friend Captain Morstan came to my hut in
     the dead of the night with a lantern.

     "'I want you just to let Captain Morstan hear that story from your
     own lips, Small,' said he.

     "I repeated it as I had told it before.

     "'It rings true, eh?' said he. 'It's good enough to act upon?'

     "Captain Morstan nodded.

     "'Look here, Small,' said the major. 'We have been talking it over,
     my friend here and I, and we have come to the conclusion that this
     secret of yours is hardly a government matter, after all, but is a
     private concern of your own, which of course you have the power of
     disposing of as you think best. Now, the question is, what price
     would you ask for it? We might be inclined to take it up, and at
     least look into it, if we could agree as to terms.' He tried to speak
     in a cool, careless way, but his eyes were shining with excitement
     and greed.

     "'Why, as to that, gentlemen,' I answered, trying also to be cool,
     but feeling as excited as he did, 'there is only one bargain which a
     man in my position can make. I shall want yo to help me to my
     freedom, and to help my three companions to theirs.  We shall then
     take yo into partnership, and give you a fifth share to divide
     between you.'

     "'Hum!' said he. 'A fifth share! That is not very tempting.'

     "'It would come to fifty thousand apiece,' said I.

     "'But how can we gain your freedom? You know very well that you ask
     an impossibility.'

     "'Nothing of the sort,' I answered. 'I have thought it all out to the
     last detail. The only bar to our escape is that we can get no boat
     fit for the voyage, and no provisions to last us for so long a time.
     There are plenty of little yachts and yawls at Calcutta or Madras
     which would serve our turn well. Do you bring one over. We shall
     engage to get aboard her by night, and if you will drop us on any
     part of the Indian coast you will have done your part of the
     bargain.'

     "'If there were only one,' he said.

     "'None or all,' I answered. 'We have sworn it. The four of us must
     always act together.'

     "'You see, Morstan,' said he, 'Small is a man of his word. He does
     not flinch from his friend. I think we may very well trust him.'

     "'It's a dirty business,' the other answered. 'Yet, as you say, the
     money would save our commissions handsomely.'

     "'Well, Small,' said the major, 'we must, I suppose, try and meet
     you. We must first, of course, test the truth of your story. Tell me
     where the box is hid, and I shall get leave of absence and go back to
     India in the monthly relief-boat to inquire into the affair.'

     "'Not so fast,' said I, growing colder as he got hot. 'I must have
     the consent of my three comrades. I tell you that it is four or none
     with us.'

     "'Nonsense!' he broke in. 'What have three black fellows to do with
     our agreement?'

     "'Black or blue,' said I, 'they are in with me, and we all go
     together.'

     "Well, the matter ended by a second meeting, at which Mahomet Singh,
     Abdullah Khan, and Dost Akbar were all present. We talked the matter
     over again, and at last we came to an arrangement. We were to provide
     both the officers with charts of the part of the Agra fort and mark
     the place in the wall where the treasure was hid. Major Sholto was to
     go to India to test our story. If he found the box he was to leave it
     there, to send out a small yacht provisioned for a voyage, which was
     to lie off Rutland Island, and to which we were to make our way, and
     finally to return to his duties. Captain Morstan was then to apply
     for leave of absence, to meet us at Agra, and there we were to have a
     final division of the treasure, he taking the major's share as well
     as his own. All this we sealed by the most solemn oaths that the mind
     could think or the lips utter. I sat up all night with paper and ink,
     and by the morning I had the two charts all ready, signed with the
     sign of four,--that is, of Abdullah, Akbar, Mahomet, and myself.

     "Well, gentlemen, I weary you with my long story, and I know that my
     friend Mr. Jones is impatient to get me safely stowed in chokey. I'll
     make it as short as I can. The villain Sholto went off to India, but
     he never came back again. Captain Morstan showed me his name among a
     list of passengers in one of the mail-boats very shortly afterwards.
     His uncle had died, leaving him a fortune, and he had left the army,
     yet he could stoop to treat five men as he had treated us. Morstan
     went over to Agra shortly afterwards, and found, as we expected, that
     the treasure was indeed gone. The scoundrel had stolen it all,
     without carrying out one of the conditions on which we had sold him
     the secret. From that day I lived only for vengeance. I thought of it
     by day and I nursed it by night. It became an overpowering, absorbing
     passion with me. I cared nothing for the law,--nothing for the
     gallows. To escape, to track down Sholto, to have my hand upon his
     throat,--that was my one thought. Even the Agra treasure had come to
     be a smaller thing in my mind than the slaying of Sholto.

     "Well, I have set my mind on many things in this life, and never one
     which I did not carry out. But it was weary years before my time
     came. I have told you that I had picked up something of medicine. One
     day when Dr. Somerton was down with a fever a little Andaman Islander
     was picked up by a convict-gang in the woods. He was sick to death,
     and had gone to a lonely place to die. I took him in hand, though he
     was as venomous as a young snake, and after a couple of months I got
     him all right and able to walk. He took a kind of fancy to me then,
     and would hardly go back to his woods, but was always hanging about
     my hut. I learned a little of his lingo from him, and this made him
     all the fonder of me.

     "Tonga--for that was his name--was a fine boatman, and owned a big,
     roomy canoe of his own. When I found that he was devoted to me and
     would do anything to serve me, I saw my chance of escape. I talked it
     over with him. He was to bring his boat round on a certain night to
     an old wharf which was never guarded, and there he was to pick me up.
     I gave him directions to have several gourds of water and a lot of
     yams, cocoa-nuts, and sweet potatoes.

     "He was stanch and true, was little Tonga. No man ever had a more
     faithful mate. At the night named he had his boat at the wharf. As it
     chanced, however, there was one of the convict-guard down there,--a
     vile Pathan who had never missed a chance of insulting and injuring
     me. I had always vowed vengeance, and now I had my chance. It was as
     if fate had placed him in my way that I might pay my debt before I
     left the island. He stood on the bank with his back to me, and his
     carbine on his shoulder. I looked about for a stone to beat out his
     brains with, but none could I see. Then a queer thought came into my
     head and showed me where I could lay my hand on a weapon. I sat down
     in the darkness and unstrapped my wooden leg. With three long hops I
     was on him. He put his carbine to his shoulder, but I struck him
     full, and knocked the whole front of his skull in. You can see the
     split in the wood now where I hit him. We both went down together,
     for I could not keep my balance, but when I got up I found him still
     lying quiet enough. I made for the boat, and in an hour we were well
     out at sea. Tonga had brought all his earthly possessions with him,
     his arms and his gods. Among other things, he had a long bamboo
     spear, and some Andaman cocoa-nut matting, with which I make a sort
     of sail. For ten days we were beating about, trusting to luck, and on
     the eleventh we were picked up by a trader which was going from
     Singapore to Jiddah with a cargo of Malay pilgrims. They were a rum
     crowd, and Tonga and I soon managed to settle down among them. They
     had one very good quality: they let you alone and asked no questions.

     "Well, if I were to tell you all the adventures that my little chum
     and I went through, you would not thank me, for I would have you here
     until the sun was shining. Here and there we drifted about the world,
     something always turning up to keep us from London. All the time,
     however, I never lost sight of my purpose. I would dream of Sholto at
     night. A hundred times I have killed him in my sleep. At last,
     however, some three or four years ago, we found ourselves in England.
     I had no great difficulty in finding where Sholto lived, and I set to
     work to discover whether he had realized the treasure, or if he still
     had it. I made friends with someone who could help me,--I name no
     names, for I don't want to get any one else in a hole,--and I soon
     found that he still had the jewels. Then I tried to get at him in
     many ways; but he was pretty sly, and had always two prize-fighters,
     besides his sons and his khitmutgar, on guard over him.

     "One day, however, I got word that he was dying. I hurried at once to
     the garden, mad that he should slip out of my clutches like that,
     and, looking through the window, I saw him lying in his bed, with his
     sons on each side of him. I'd have come through and taken my chance
     with the three of them, only even as I looked at him his jaw dropped,
     and I knew that he was gone. I got into his room that same night,
     though, and I searched his papers to see if there was any record of
     where he had hidden our jewels. There was not a line, however: so I
     came away, bitter and savage as a man could be. Before I left I
     bethought me that if I ever met my Sikh friends again it would be a
     satisfaction to know that I had left some mark of our hatred: so I
     scrawled down the sign of the four of us, as it had been on the
     chart, and I pinned it on his bosom. It was too much that he should
     be taken to the grave without some token from the men whom he had
     robbed and befooled.

     "We earned a living at this time by my exhibiting poor Tonga at fairs
     and other such places as the black cannibal. He would eat raw meat
     and dance his war-dance: so we always had a hatful of pennies after a
     day's work. I still heard all the news from Pondicherry Lodge, and
     for some years there was no news to hear, except that they were
     hunting for the treasure. At last, however, came what we had waited
     for so long. The treasure had been found. It was up at the top of the
     house, in Mr. Bartholomew Sholto's chemical laboratory. I came at
     once and had a look at the place, but I could not see how with my
     wooden leg I was to make my way up to it. I learned, however, about a
     trap-door in the roof, and also about Mr. Sholto's supper-hour. It
     seemed to me that I could manage the thing easily through Tonga. I
     brought him out with me with a long rope wound round his waist. He
     could climb like a cat, and he soon made his way through the roof,
     but, as ill luck would have it, Bartholomew Sholto was still in the
     room, to his cost. Tonga thought he had done something very clever in
     killing him, for when I came up by the rope I found him strutting
     about as proud as a peacock. Very much surprised was he when I made
     at him with the rope's end and cursed him for a little blood-thirsty
     imp. I took the treasure-box and let it down, and then slid down
     myself, having first left the sign of the four upon the table, to
     show that the jewels had come back at last to those who had most
     right to them. Tonga then pulled up the rope, closed the window, and
     made off the way that he had come.

     "I don't know that I have anything else to tell you. I had heard a
     waterman speak of the speed of Smith's launch, the Aurora, so I
     thought she would be a handy craft for our escape. I engaged with old
     Smith, and was to give him a big sum if he got us safe to our ship.
     He knew, no doubt, that there was some screw loose, but he was not in
     our secrets. All this is the truth, and if I tell it to you,
     gentlemen, it is not to amuse you,--for you have not done me a very
     good turn,--but it is because I believe the best defence I can make
     is just to hold back nothing, but let all the wold know how badly I
     have myself been served by Major Sholto, and how innocent I am of the
     death of his son."

     "A very remarkable account," said Sherlock Holmes. "A fitting wind-up
     to an extremely interesting case. There is nothing at all new to me
     in the latter part of your narrative, except that you brought your
     own rope. That I did not know. By the way, I had hoped that Tonga had
     lost all his darts; yet he managed to shoot one at us in the boat."

     "He had lost them all, sir, except the one which was in his blow-pipe
     at the time."

     "Ah, of course," said Holmes. "I had not thought of that."

     "Is there any other point which you would like to ask about?" asked
     the convict, affably.

     "I think not, thank you," my companion answered.

     "Well, Holmes," said Athelney Jones, "You are a man to be humored,
     and we all know that you are a connoisseur of crime, but duty is
     duty, and I have gone rather far in doing what you and your friend
     asked me. I shall feel more at ease when we have our story-teller
     here safe under lock and key. The cab still waits, and there are two
     inspectors down-stairs. I am much obliged to you both for your
     assistance. Of course you will be wanted at the trial. Good-night to
     you."

     "Good-night, gentlemen both," said Jonathan Small.

     "You first, Small," remarked the wary Jones as they left the room.
     "I'll take particular care that you don't club me with your wooden
     leg, whatever you may have done to the gentleman at the Andaman
     Isles."

     "Well, and there is the end of our little drama," I remarked, after
     we had set some time smoking in silence. "I fear that it may be the
     last investigation in which I shall have the chance of studying your
     methods. Miss Morstan has done me the honor to accept me as a husband
     in prospective."

     He gave a most dismal groan. "I feared as much," said he. "I really
     cannot congratulate you."

     I was a little hurt. "Have you any reason to be dissatisfied with my
     choice?" I asked.

     "Not at all. I think she is one of the most charming young ladies I
     ever met, and might have been most useful in such work as we have
     been doing. She had a decided genius that way: witness the way in
     which she preserved that Agra plan from all the other papers of her
     father. But love is an emotional thing, and whatever is emotional is
     opposed to that true cold reason which I place above all things. I
     should never marry myself, lest I bias my judgment."

     "I trust," said I, laughing, "that my judgment may survive the
     ordeal. But you look weary."

     "Yes, the reaction is already upon me. I shall be as limp as a rag
     for a week."

     "Strange," said I, "how terms of what in another man I should call
     laziness alternate with your fits of splendid energy and vigor."

     "Yes," he answered, "there are in me the makings of a very fine
     loafer and also of a pretty spry sort of fellow. I often think of
     those lines of old Goethe,--

              Schade, da?die Natur nur einen Mensch aus Dir schuf,
             Denn zum wrdigen Mann war und zum Schelmen der Stoff.

     "By the way, a propos of this Norwood business, you see that they
     had, as I surmised, a confederate in the house, who could be none
     other than Lal Rao, the butler: so Jones actually has the undivided
     honor of having caught one fish in his great haul."

     "The division seems rather unfair," I remarked. "You have done all
     the work in this business. I get a wife out of it, Jones gets the
     credit, pray what remains for you?"

     "For me," said Sherlock Holmes, "there still remains the
     cocaine-bottle." And he stretched his long white hand up for it.






                        THE ADVENTURES OF SHERLOCK HOLMES





                              A SCANDAL IN BOHEMIA





                                Table of contents
                                     Chapter 1
                                     Chapter 2
                                     Chapter 3















          CHAPTER I



     To Sherlock Holmes she is always the woman. I have seldom heard him
     mention her under any other name. In his eyes she eclipses and
     predominates the whole of her sex. It was not that he felt any
     emotion akin to love for Irene Adler. All emotions, and that one
     particularly, were abhorrent to his cold, precise but admirably
     balanced mind. He was, I take it, the most perfect reasoning and
     observing machine that the world has seen, but as a lover he would
     have placed himself in a false position. He never spoke of the softer
     passions, save with a gibe and a sneer. They were admirable things
     for the observer--excellent for drawing the veil from men's motives
     and actions. But for the trained reasoner to admit such intrusions
     into his own delicate and finely adjusted temperament was to
     introduce a distracting factor which might throw a doubt upon all his
     mental results. Grit in a sensitive instrument, or a crack in one of
     his own high-power lenses, would not be more disturbing than a strong
     emotion in a nature such as his. And yet there was but one woman to
     him, and that woman was the late Irene Adler, of dubious and
     questionable memory.

     I had seen little of Holmes lately. My marriage had drifted us away
     from each other. My own complete happiness, and the home-centred
     interests which rise up around the man who first finds himself master
     of his own establishment, were sufficient to absorb all my attention,
     while Holmes, who loathed every form of society with his whole
     Bohemian soul, remained in our lodgings in Baker Street, buried among
     his old books, and alternating from week to week between cocaine and
     ambition, the drowsiness of the drug, and the fierce energy of his
     own keen nature. He was still, as ever, deeply attracted by the study
     of crime, and occupied his immense faculties and extraordinary powers
     of observation in following out those clues, and clearing up those
     mysteries which had been abandoned as hopeless by the official
     police. From time to time I heard some vague account of his doings:
     of his summons to Odessa in the case of the Trepoff murder, of his
     clearing up of the singular tragedy of the Atkinson brothers at
     Trincomalee, and finally of the mission which he had accomplished so
     delicately and successfully for the reigning family of Holland.
     Beyond these signs of his activity, however, which I merely shared
     with all the readers of the daily press, I knew little of my former
     friend and companion.

     One night--it was on the twentieth of March, 1888--I was returning
     from a journey to a patient (for I had now returned to civil
     practice), when my way led me through Baker Street. As I passed the
     well-remembered door, which must always be associated in my mind with
     my wooing, and with the dark incidents of the Study in Scarlet, I was
     seized with a keen desire to see Holmes again, and to know how he was
     employing his extraordinary powers. His rooms were brilliantly lit,
     and, even as I looked up, I saw his tall, spare figure pass twice in
     a dark silhouette against the blind. He was pacing the room swiftly,
     eagerly, with his head sunk upon his chest and his hands clasped
     behind him. To me, who knew his every mood and habit, his attitude
     and manner told their own story. He was at work again. He had risen
     out of his drug-created dreams and was hot upon the scent of some new
     problem. I rang the bell and was shown up to the chamber which had
     formerly been in part my own.

     His manner was not effusive. It seldom was; but he was glad, I think,
     to see me. With hardly a word spoken, but with a kindly eye, he waved
     me to an armchair, threw across his case of cigars, and indicated a
     spirit case and a gasogene in the corner. Then he stood before the
     fire and looked me over in his singular introspective fashion.

     "Wedlock suits you," he remarked. "I think, Watson, that you have put
     on seven and a half pounds since I saw you."

     "Seven!" I answered.

     "Indeed, I should have thought a little more. Just a trifle more, I
     fancy, Watson. And in practice again, I observe. You did not tell me
     that you intended to go into harness."

     "Then, how do you know?"

     "I see it, I deduce it. How do I know that you have been getting
     yourself very wet lately, and that you have a most clumsy and
     careless servant girl?"

     "My dear Holmes," said I, "this is too much. You would certainly have
     been burned, had you lived a few centuries ago. It is true that I had
     a country walk on Thursday and came home in a dreadful mess, but as I
     have changed my clothes I can't imagine how you deduce it. As to Mary
     Jane, she is incorrigible, and my wife has given her notice, but
     there, again, I fail to see how you work it out."

     He chuckled to himself and rubbed his long, nervous hands together.

     "It is simplicity itself," said he; "my eyes tell me that on the
     inside of your left shoe, just where the firelight strikes it, the
     leather is scored by six almost parallel cuts. Obviously they have
     been caused by someone who has very carelessly scraped round the
     edges of the sole in order to remove crusted mud from it. Hence, you
     see, my double deduction that you had been out in vile weather, and
     that you had a particularly malignant boot-slitting specimen of the
     London slavey. As to your practice, if a gentleman walks into my
     rooms smelling of iodoform, with a black mark of nitrate of silver
     upon his right forefinger, and a bulge on the right side of his
     top-hat to show where he has secreted his stethoscope, I must be
     dull, indeed, if I do not pronounce him to be an active member of the
     medical profession."

     I could not help laughing at the ease with which he explained his
     process of deduction. "When I hear you give your reasons," I
     remarked, "the thing always appears to me to be so ridiculously
     simple that I could easily do it myself, though at each successive
     instance of your reasoning I am baffled until you explain your
     process. And yet I believe that my eyes are as good as yours."

     "Quite so," he answered, lighting a cigarette, and throwing himself
     down into an armchair. "You see, but you do not observe. The
     distinction is clear. For example, you have frequently seen the steps
     which lead up from the hall to this room."

     "Frequently."

     "How often?"

     "Well, some hundreds of times."

     "Then how many are there?"

     "How many? I don't know."

     "Quite so! You have not observed. And yet you have seen. That is just
     my point. Now, I know that there are seventeen steps, because I have
     both seen and observed. By-the-way, since you are interested in these
     little problems, and since you are good enough to chronicle one or
     two of my trifling experiences, you may be interested in this." He
     threw over a sheet of thick, pink-tinted note-paper which had been
     lying open upon the table. "It came by the last post," said he. "Read
     it aloud."

     The note was undated, and without either signature or address.

     "There will call upon you to-night, at a quarter to eight o'clock,"
     it said, "a gentleman who desires to consult you upon a matter of the
     very deepest moment. Your recent services to one of the royal houses
     of Europe have shown that you are one who may safely be trusted with
     matters which are of an importance which can hardly be exaggerated.
     This account of you we have from all quarters received. Be in your
     chamber then at that hour, and do not take it amiss if your visitor
     wear a mask."

     "This is indeed a mystery," I remarked. "What do you imagine that it
     means?"

     "I have no data yet. It is a capital mistake to theorize before one
     has data. Insensibly one begins to twist facts to suit theories,
     instead of theories to suit facts. But the note itself. What do you
     deduce from it?"

     I carefully examined the writing, and the paper upon which it was
     written.

     "The man who wrote it was presumably well to do," I remarked,
     endeavouring to imitate my companion's processes. "Such paper could
     not be bought under half a crown a packet. It is peculiarly strong
     and stiff."

     "Peculiar--that is the very word," said Holmes. "It is not an English
     paper at all. Hold it up to the light."

     I did so, and saw a large "E" with a small "g," a "P," and a large
     "G" with a small "t" woven into the texture of the paper.

     "What do you make of that?" asked Holmes.

     "The name of the maker, no doubt; or his monogram, rather."

     "Not at all. The 'G' with the small 't' stands for 'Gesellschaft,'
     which is the German for 'Company.' It is a customary contraction like
     our 'Co.' 'P,' of course, stands for 'Papier.' Now for the 'Eg.' Let
     us glance at our Continental Gazetteer." He took down a heavy brown
     volume from his shelves. "Eglow, Eglonitz--here we are, Egria. It is
     in a German-speaking country--in Bohemia, not far from Carlsbad.
     'Remarkable as being the scene of the death of Wallenstein, and for
     its numerous glass-factories and paper-mills.' Ha, ha, my boy, what
     do you make of that?" His eyes sparkled, and he sent up a great blue
     triumphant cloud from his cigarette.

     "The paper was made in Bohemia," I said.

     "Precisely. And the man who wrote the note is a German. Do you note
     the peculiar construction of the sentence--'This account of you we
     have from all quarters received.' A Frenchman or Russian could not
     have written that. It is the German who is so uncourteous to his
     verbs. It only remains, therefore, to discover what is wanted by this
     German who writes upon Bohemian paper and prefers wearing a mask to
     showing his face. And here he comes, if I am not mistaken, to resolve
     all our doubts."

     As he spoke there was the sharp sound of horses' hoofs and grating
     wheels against the curb, followed by a sharp pull at the bell. Holmes
     whistled.

     "A pair, by the sound," said he. "Yes," he continued, glancing out of
     the window. "A nice little brougham and a pair of beauties. A hundred
     and fifty guineas apiece. There's money in this case, Watson, if
     there is nothing else."

     "I think that I had better go, Holmes."

     "Not a bit, Doctor. Stay where you are. I am lost without my Boswell.
     And this promises to be interesting. It would be a pity to miss it."

     "But your client--"

     "Never mind him. I may want your help, and so may he. Here he comes.
     Sit down in that armchair, Doctor, and give us your best attention."

     A slow and heavy step, which had been heard upon the stairs and in
     the passage, paused immediately outside the door. Then there was a
     loud and authoritative tap.

     "Come in!" said Holmes.

     A man entered who could hardly have been less than six feet six
     inches in height, with the chest and limbs of a Hercules. His dress
     was rich with a richness which would, in England, be looked upon as
     akin to bad taste. Heavy bands of astrakhan were slashed across the
     sleeves and fronts of his double-breasted coat, while the deep blue
     cloak which was thrown over his shoulders was lined with
     flame-coloured silk and secured at the neck with a brooch which
     consisted of a single flaming beryl. Boots which extended halfway up
     his calves, and which were trimmed at the tops with rich brown fur,
     completed the impression of barbaric opulence which was suggested by
     his whole appearance. He carried a broad-brimmed hat in his hand,
     while he wore across the upper part of his face, extending down past
     the cheekbones, a black vizard mask, which he had apparently adjusted
     that very moment, for his hand was still raised to it as he entered.
     From the lower part of the face he appeared to be a man of strong
     character, with a thick, hanging lip, and a long, straight chin
     suggestive of resolution pushed to the length of obstinacy.

     "You had my note?" he asked with a deep harsh voice and a strongly
     marked German accent. "I told you that I would call." He looked from
     one to the other of us, as if uncertain which to address.

     "Pray take a seat," said Holmes. "This is my friend and colleague,
     Dr. Watson, who is occasionally good enough to help me in my cases.
     Whom have I the honour to address?"

     "You may address me as the Count Von Kramm, a Bohemian nobleman. I
     understand that this gentleman, your friend, is a man of honour and
     discretion, whom I may trust with a matter of the most extreme
     importance. If not, I should much prefer to communicate with you
     alone."

     I rose to go, but Holmes caught me by the wrist and pushed me back
     into my chair. "It is both, or none," said he. "You may say before
     this gentleman anything which you may say to me."

     The Count shrugged his broad shoulders. "Then I must begin," said he,
     "by binding you both to absolute secrecy for two years; at the end of
     that time the matter will be of no importance. At present it is not
     too much to say that it is of such weight it may have an influence
     upon European history."

     "I promise," said Holmes.

     "And I."

     "You will excuse this mask," continued our strange visitor. "The
     august person who employs me wishes his agent to be unknown to you,
     and I may confess at once that the title by which I have just called
     myself is not exactly my own."

     "I was aware of it," said Holmes dryly.

     "The circumstances are of great delicacy, and every precaution has to
     be taken to quench what might grow to be an immense scandal and
     seriously compromise one of the reigning families of Europe. To speak
     plainly, the matter implicates the great House of Ormstein,
     hereditary kings of Bohemia."

     "I was also aware of that," murmured Holmes, settling himself down in
     his armchair and closing his eyes.

     Our visitor glanced with some apparent surprise at the languid,
     lounging figure of the man who had been no doubt depicted to him as
     the most incisive reasoner and most energetic agent in Europe. Holmes
     slowly reopened his eyes and looked impatiently at his gigantic
     client.

     "If your Majesty would condescend to state your case," he remarked,
     "I should be better able to advise you."

     The man sprang from his chair and paced up and down the room in
     uncontrollable agitation. Then, with a gesture of desperation, he
     tore the mask from his face and hurled it upon the ground. "You are
     right," he cried; "I am the King. Why should I attempt to conceal
     it?"

     "Why, indeed?" murmured Holmes. "Your Majesty had not spoken before I
     was aware that I was addressing Wilhelm Gottsreich Sigismond von
     Ormstein, Grand Duke of Cassel-Felstein, and hereditary King of
     Bohemia."

     "But you can understand," said our strange visitor, sitting down once
     more and passing his hand over his high white forehead, "you can
     understand that I am not accustomed to doing such business in my own
     person. Yet the matter was so delicate that I could not confide it to
     an agent without putting myself in his power. I have come incognito
     from Prague for the purpose of consulting you."

     "Then, pray consult," said Holmes, shutting his eyes once more.

     "The facts are briefly these: Some five years ago, during a lengthy
     visit to Warsaw, I made the acquaintance of the well-known
     adventuress, Irene Adler. The name is no doubt familiar to you."

     "Kindly look her up in my index, Doctor," murmured Holmes without
     opening his eyes. For many years he had adopted a system of docketing
     all paragraphs concerning men and things, so that it was difficult to
     name a subject or a person on which he could not at once furnish
     information. In this case I found her biography sandwiched in between
     that of a Hebrew rabbi and that of a staff-commander who had written
     a monograph upon the deep-sea fishes.

     "Let me see!" said Holmes. "Hum! Born in New Jersey in the year 1858.
     Contralto--hum! La Scala, hum! Prima donna Imperial Opera of
     Warsaw--yes! Retired from operatic stage--ha! Living in London--quite
     so! Your Majesty, as I understand, became entangled with this young
     person, wrote her some compromising letters, and is now desirous of
     getting those letters back."

     "Precisely so. But how--"

     "Was there a secret marriage?"

     "None."

     "No legal papers or certificates?"

     "None."

     "Then I fail to follow your Majesty. If this young person should
     produce her letters for blackmailing or other purposes, how is she to
     prove their authenticity?"

     "There is the writing."

     "Pooh, pooh! Forgery."

     "My private note-paper."

     "Stolen."

     "My own seal."

     "Imitated."

     "My photograph."

     "Bought."

     "We were both in the photograph."

     "Oh, dear! That is very bad! Your Majesty has indeed committed an
     indiscretion."

     "I was mad--insane."

     "You have compromised yourself seriously."

     "I was only Crown Prince then. I was young. I am but thirty now."

     "It must be recovered."

     "We have tried and failed."

     "Your Majesty must pay. It must be bought."

     "She will not sell."

     "Stolen, then."

     "Five attempts have been made. Twice burglars in my pay ransacked her
     house. Once we diverted her luggage when she travelled. Twice she has
     been waylaid. There has been no result."

     "No sign of it?"

     "Absolutely none."

     Holmes laughed. "It is quite a pretty little problem," said he.

     "But a very serious one to me," returned the King reproachfully.

     "Very, indeed. And what does she propose to do with the photograph?"

     "To ruin me."

     "But how?"

     "I am about to be married."

     "So I have heard."

     "To Clotilde Lothman von Saxe-Meningen, second daughter of the King
     of Scandinavia. You may know the strict principles of her family. She
     is herself the very soul of delicacy. A shadow of a doubt as to my
     conduct would bring the matter to an end."

     "And Irene Adler?"

     "Threatens to send them the photograph. And she will do it. I know
     that she will do it. You do not know her, but she has a soul of
     steel. She has the face of the most beautiful of women, and the mind
     of the most resolute of men. Rather than I should marry another
     woman, there are no lengths to which she would not go--none."

     "You are sure that she has not sent it yet?"

     "I am sure."

     "And why?"

     "Because she has said that she would send it on the day when the
     betrothal was publicly proclaimed. That will be next Monday."

     "Oh, then we have three days yet," said Holmes with a yawn. "That is
     very fortunate, as I have one or two matters of importance to look
     into just at present. Your Majesty will, of course, stay in London
     for the present?"

     "Certainly. You will find me at the Langham under the name of the
     Count Von Kramm."

     "Then I shall drop you a line to let you know how we progress."

     "Pray do so. I shall be all anxiety."

     "Then, as to money?"

     "You have carte blanche."

     "Absolutely?"

     "I tell you that I would give one of the provinces of my kingdom to
     have that photograph."

     "And for present expenses?"

     The King took a heavy chamois leather bag from under his cloak and
     laid it on the table.

     "There are three hundred pounds in gold and seven hundred in notes,"
     he said.

     Holmes scribbled a receipt upon a sheet of his note-book and handed
     it to him.

     "And Mademoiselle's address?" he asked.

     "Is Briony Lodge, Serpentine Avenue, St. John's Wood."

     Holmes took a note of it. "One other question," said he. "Was the
     photograph a cabinet?"

     "It was."

     "Then, good-night, your Majesty, and I trust that we shall soon have
     some good news for you. And good-night, Watson," he added, as the
     wheels of the royal brougham rolled down the street. "If you will be
     good enough to call to-morrow afternoon at three o'clock I should
     like to chat this little matter over with you."





          CHAPTER II



     At three o'clock precisely I was at Baker Street, but Holmes had not
     yet returned. The landlady informed me that he had left the house
     shortly after eight o'clock in the morning. I sat down beside the
     fire, however, with the intention of awaiting him, however long he
     might be. I was already deeply interested in his inquiry, for, though
     it was surrounded by none of the grim and strange features which were
     associated with the two crimes which I have already recorded, still,
     the nature of the case and the exalted station of his client gave it
     a character of its own. Indeed, apart from the nature of the
     investigation which my friend had on hand, there was something in his
     masterly grasp of a situation, and his keen, incisive reasoning,
     which made it a pleasure to me to study his system of work, and to
     follow the quick, subtle methods by which he disentangled the most
     inextricable mysteries. So accustomed was I to his invariable success
     that the very possibility of his failing had ceased to enter into my
     head.

     It was close upon four before the door opened, and a drunken-looking
     groom, ill-kempt and side-whiskered, with an inflamed face and
     disreputable clothes, walked into the room. Accustomed as I was to my
     friend's amazing powers in the use of disguises, I had to look three
     times before I was certain that it was indeed he. With a nod he
     vanished into the bedroom, whence he emerged in five minutes
     tweed-suited and respectable, as of old. Putting his hands into his
     pockets, he stretched out his legs in front of the fire and laughed
     heartily for some minutes.

     "Well, really!" he cried, and then he choked and laughed again until
     he was obliged to lie back, limp and helpless, in the chair.

     "What is it?"

     "It's quite too funny. I am sure you could never guess how I employed
     my morning, or what I ended by doing."

     "I can't imagine. I suppose that you have been watching the habits,
     and perhaps the house, of Miss Irene Adler."

     "Quite so; but the sequel was rather unusual. I will tell you,
     however. I left the house a little after eight o'clock this morning
     in the character of a groom out of work. There is a wonderful
     sympathy and freemasonry among horsey men. Be one of them, and you
     will know all that there is to know. I soon found Briony Lodge. It is
     a bijou villa, with a garden at the back, but built out in front
     right up to the road, two stories. Chubb lock to the door. Large
     sitting-room on the right side, well furnished, with long windows
     almost to the floor, and those preposterous English window fasteners
     which a child could open. Behind there was nothing remarkable, save
     that the passage window could be reached from the top of the
     coach-house. I walked round it and examined it closely from every
     point of view, but without noting anything else of interest.

     "I then lounged down the street and found, as I expected, that there
     was a mews in a lane which runs down by one wall of the garden. I
     lent the ostlers a hand in rubbing down their horses, and received in
     exchange twopence, a glass of half and half, two fills of shag
     tobacco, and as much information as I could desire about Miss Adler,
     to say nothing of half a dozen other people in the neighbourhood in
     whom I was not in the least interested, but whose biographies I was
     compelled to listen to."

     "And what of Irene Adler?" I asked.

     "Oh, she has turned all the men's heads down in that part. She is the
     daintiest thing under a bonnet on this planet. So say the
     Serpentine-mews, to a man. She lives quietly, sings at concerts,
     drives out at five every day, and returns at seven sharp for dinner.
     Seldom goes out at other times, except when she sings. Has only one
     male visitor, but a good deal of him. He is dark, handsome, and
     dashing, never calls less than once a day, and often twice. He is a
     Mr. Godfrey Norton, of the Inner Temple. See the advantages of a
     cabman as a confidant. They had driven him home a dozen times from
     Serpentine-mews, and knew all about him. When I had listened to all
     they had to tell, I began to walk up and down near Briony Lodge once
     more, and to think over my plan of campaign.

     "This Godfrey Norton was evidently an important factor in the matter.
     He was a lawyer. That sounded ominous. What was the relation between
     them, and what the object of his repeated visits? Was she his client,
     his friend, or his mistress? If the former, she had probably
     transferred the photograph to his keeping. If the latter, it was less
     likely. On the issue of this question depended whether I should
     continue my work at Briony Lodge, or turn my attention to the
     gentleman's chambers in the Temple. It was a delicate point, and it
     widened the field of my inquiry. I fear that I bore you with these
     details, but I have to let you see my little difficulties, if you are
     to understand the situation."

     "I am following you closely," I answered.

     "I was still balancing the matter in my mind when a hansom cab drove
     up to Briony Lodge, and a gentleman sprang out. He was a remarkably
     handsome man, dark, aquiline, and moustached--evidently the man of
     whom I had heard. He appeared to be in a great hurry, shouted to the
     cabman to wait, and brushed past the maid who opened the door with
     the air of a man who was thoroughly at home.

     "He was in the house about half an hour, and I could catch glimpses
     of him in the windows of the sitting-room, pacing up and down,
     talking excitedly, and waving his arms. Of her I could see nothing.
     Presently he emerged, looking even more flurried than before. As he
     stepped up to the cab, he pulled a gold watch from his pocket and
     looked at it earnestly, 'Drive like the devil,' he shouted, 'first to
     Gross & Hankey's in Regent Street, and then to the Church of St.
     Monica in the Edgeware Road. Half a guinea if you do it in twenty
     minutes!'

     "Away they went, and I was just wondering whether I should not do
     well to follow them when up the lane came a neat little landau, the
     coachman with his coat only half-buttoned, and his tie under his ear,
     while all the tags of his harness were sticking out of the buckles.
     It hadn't pulled up before she shot out of the hall door and into it.
     I only caught a glimpse of her at the moment, but she was a lovely
     woman, with a face that a man might die for.

     "'The Church of St. Monica, John,' she cried, 'and half a sovereign
     if you reach it in twenty minutes.'

     "This was quite too good to lose, Watson. I was just balancing
     whether I should run for it, or whether I should perch behind her
     landau when a cab came through the street. The driver looked twice at
     such a shabby fare, but I jumped in before he could object. 'The
     Church of St. Monica,' said I, 'and half a sovereign if you reach it
     in twenty minutes.' It was twenty-five minutes to twelve, and of
     course it was clear enough what was in the wind.

     "My cabby drove fast. I don't think I ever drove faster, but the
     others were there before us. The cab and the landau with their
     steaming horses were in front of the door when I arrived. I paid the
     man and hurried into the church. There was not a soul there save the
     two whom I had followed and a surpliced clergyman, who seemed to be
     expostulating with them. They were all three standing in a knot in
     front of the altar. I lounged up the side aisle like any other idler
     who has dropped into a church. Suddenly, to my surprise, the three at
     the altar faced round to me, and Godfrey Norton came running as hard
     as he could towards me.

     "'Thank God,' he cried. 'You'll do. Come! Come!'

     "'What then?' I asked.

     "'Come, man, come, only three minutes, or it won't be legal.'

     "I was half-dragged up to the altar, and before I knew where I was I
     found myself mumbling responses which were whispered in my ear, and
     vouching for things of which I knew nothing, and generally assisting
     in the secure tying up of Irene Adler, spinster, to Godfrey Norton,
     bachelor. It was all done in an instant, and there was the gentleman
     thanking me on the one side and the lady on the other, while the
     clergyman beamed on me in front. It was the most preposterous
     position in which I ever found myself in my life, and it was the
     thought of it that started me laughing just now. It seems that there
     had been some informality about their license, that the clergyman
     absolutely refused to marry them without a witness of some sort, and
     that my lucky appearance saved the bridegroom from having to sally
     out into the streets in search of a best man. The bride gave me a
     sovereign, and I mean to wear it on my watch-chain in memory of the
     occasion."

     "This is a very unexpected turn of affairs," said I; "and what then?"

     "Well, I found my plans very seriously menaced. It looked as if the
     pair might take an immediate departure, and so necessitate very
     prompt and energetic measures on my part. At the church door,
     however, they separated, he driving back to the Temple, and she to
     her own house. 'I shall drive out in the park at five as usual,' she
     said as she left him. I heard no more. They drove away in different
     directions, and I went off to make my own arrangements."

     "Which are?"

     "Some cold beef and a glass of beer," he answered, ringing the bell.
     "I have been too busy to think of food, and I am likely to be busier
     still this evening. By the way, Doctor, I shall want your
     co-operation."

     "I shall be delighted."

     "You don't mind breaking the law?"

     "Not in the least."

     "Nor running a chance of arrest?"

     "Not in a good cause."

     "Oh, the cause is excellent!"

     "Then I am your man."

     "I was sure that I might rely on you."

     "But what is it you wish?"

     "When Mrs. Turner has brought in the tray I will make it clear to
     you. Now," he said as he turned hungrily on the simple fare that our
     landlady had provided, "I must discuss it while I eat, for I have not
     much time. It is nearly five now. In two hours we must be on the
     scene of action. Miss Irene, or Madame, rather, returns from her
     drive at seven. We must be at Briony Lodge to meet her."

     "And what then?"

     "You must leave that to me. I have already arranged what is to occur.
     There is only one point on which I must insist. You must not
     interfere, come what may. You understand?"

     "I am to be neutral?"

     "To do nothing whatever. There will probably be some small
     unpleasantness. Do not join in it. It will end in my being conveyed
     into the house. Four or five minutes afterwards the sitting-room
     window will open. You are to station yourself close to that open
     window."

     "Yes."

     "You are to watch me, for I will be visible to you."

     "Yes."

     "And when I raise my hand--so--you will throw into the room what I
     give you to throw, and will, at the same time, raise the cry of fire.
     You quite follow me?"

     "Entirely."

     "It is nothing very formidable," he said, taking a long cigar-shaped
     roll from his pocket. "It is an ordinary plumber's smoke-rocket,
     fitted with a cap at either end to make it self-lighting. Your task
     is confined to that. When you raise your cry of fire, it will be
     taken up by quite a number of people. You may then walk to the end of
     the street, and I will rejoin you in ten minutes. I hope that I have
     made myself clear?"

     "I am to remain neutral, to get near the window, to watch you, and at
     the signal to throw in this object, then to raise the cry of fire,
     and to wait you at the corner of the street."

     "Precisely."

     "Then you may entirely rely on me."

     "That is excellent. I think, perhaps, it is almost time that I
     prepare for the new role I have to play."

     He disappeared into his bedroom and returned in a few minutes in the
     character of an amiable and simple-minded Nonconformist clergyman.
     His broad black hat, his baggy trousers, his white tie, his
     sympathetic smile, and general look of peering and benevolent
     curiosity were such as Mr. John Hare alone could have equalled. It
     was not merely that Holmes changed his costume. His expression, his
     manner, his very soul seemed to vary with every fresh part that he
     assumed. The stage lost a fine actor, even as science lost an acute
     reasoner, when he became a specialist in crime.

     It was a quarter past six when we left Baker Street, and it still
     wanted ten minutes to the hour when we found ourselves in Serpentine
     Avenue. It was already dusk, and the lamps were just being lighted as
     we paced up and down in front of Briony Lodge, waiting for the coming
     of its occupant. The house was just such as I had pictured it from
     Sherlock Holmes' succinct description, but the locality appeared to
     be less private than I expected. On the contrary, for a small street
     in a quiet neighbourhood, it was remarkably animated. There was a
     group of shabbily dressed men smoking and laughing in a corner, a
     scissors-grinder with his wheel, two guardsmen who were flirting with
     a nurse-girl, and several well-dressed young men who were lounging up
     and down with cigars in their mouths.

     "You see," remarked Holmes, as we paced to and fro in front of the
     house, "this marriage rather simplifies matters. The photograph
     becomes a double-edged weapon now. The chances are that she would be
     as averse to its being seen by Mr. Godfrey Norton, as our client is
     to its coming to the eyes of his princess. Now the question is, Where
     are we to find the photograph?"

     "Where, indeed?"

     "It is most unlikely that she carries it about with her. It is
     cabinet size. Too large for easy concealment about a woman's dress.
     She knows that the King is capable of having her waylaid and
     searched. Two attempts of the sort have already been made. We may
     take it, then, that she does not carry it about with her."

     "Where, then?"

     "Her banker or her lawyer. There is that double possibility. But I am
     inclined to think neither. Women are naturally secretive, and they
     like to do their own secreting. Why should she hand it over to anyone
     else? She could trust her own guardianship, but she could not tell
     what indirect or political influence might be brought to bear upon a
     business man. Besides, remember that she had resolved to use it
     within a few days. It must be where she can lay her hands upon it. It
     must be in her own house."

     "But it has twice been burgled."

     "Pshaw! They did not know how to look."

     "But how will you look?"

     "I will not look."

     "What then?"

     "I will get her to show me."

     "But she will refuse."

     "She will not be able to. But I hear the rumble of wheels. It is her
     carriage. Now carry out my orders to the letter."

     As he spoke the gleam of the side-lights of a carriage came round the
     curve of the avenue. It was a smart little landau which rattled up to
     the door of Briony Lodge. As it pulled up, one of the loafing men at
     the corner dashed forward to open the door in the hope of earning a
     copper, but was elbowed away by another loafer, who had rushed up
     with the same intention. A fierce quarrel broke out, which was
     increased by the two guardsmen, who took sides with one of the
     loungers, and by the scissors-grinder, who was equally hot upon the
     other side. A blow was struck, and in an instant the lady, who had
     stepped from her carriage, was the centre of a little knot of flushed
     and struggling men, who struck savagely at each other with their
     fists and sticks. Holmes dashed into the crowd to protect the lady;
     but just as he reached her he gave a cry and dropped to the ground,
     with the blood running freely down his face. At his fall the
     guardsmen took to their heels in one direction and the loungers in
     the other, while a number of better-dressed people, who had watched
     the scuffle without taking part in it, crowded in to help the lady
     and to attend to the injured man. Irene Adler, as I will still call
     her, had hurried up the steps; but she stood at the top with her
     superb figure outlined against the lights of the hall, looking back
     into the street.

     "Is the poor gentleman much hurt?" she asked.

     "He is dead," cried several voices.

     "No, no, there's life in him!" shouted another. "But he'll be gone
     before you can get him to hospital."

     "He's a brave fellow," said a woman. "They would have had the lady's
     purse and watch if it hadn't been for him. They were a gang, and a
     rough one, too. Ah, he's breathing now."

     "He can't lie in the street. May we bring him in, marm?"

     "Surely. Bring him into the sitting-room. There is a comfortable
     sofa. This way, please!"

     Slowly and solemnly he was borne into Briony Lodge and laid out in
     the principal room, while I still observed the proceedings from my
     post by the window. The lamps had been lit, but the blinds had not
     been drawn, so that I could see Holmes as he lay upon the couch. I do
     not know whether he was seized with compunction at that moment for
     the part he was playing, but I know that I never felt more heartily
     ashamed of myself in my life than when I saw the beautiful creature
     against whom I was conspiring, or the grace and kindliness with which
     she waited upon the injured man. And yet it would be the blackest
     treachery to Holmes to draw back now from the part which he had
     intrusted to me. I hardened my heart, and took the smoke-rocket from
     under my ulster. After all, I thought, we are not injuring her. We
     are but preventing her from injuring another.

     Holmes had sat up upon the couch, and I saw him motion like a man who
     is in need of air. A maid rushed across and threw open the window. At
     the same instant I saw him raise his hand and at the signal I tossed
     my rocket into the room with a cry of "Fire!" The word was no sooner
     out of my mouth than the whole crowd of spectators, well dressed and
     ill--gentlemen, ostlers, and servant-maids--joined in a general
     shriek of "Fire!" Thick clouds of smoke curled through the room and
     out at the open window. I caught a glimpse of rushing figures, and a
     moment later the voice of Holmes from within assuring them that it
     was a false alarm. Slipping through the shouting crowd I made my way
     to the corner of the street, and in ten minutes was rejoiced to find
     my friend's arm in mine, and to get away from the scene of uproar. He
     walked swiftly and in silence for some few minutes until we had
     turned down one of the quiet streets which lead towards the Edgeware
     Road.

     "You did it very nicely, Doctor," he remarked. "Nothing could have
     been better. It is all right."

     "You have the photograph?"

     "I know where it is."

     "And how did you find out?"

     "She showed me, as I told you she would."

     "I am still in the dark."

     "I do not wish to make a mystery," said he, laughing. "The matter was
     perfectly simple. You, of course, saw that everyone in the street was
     an accomplice. They were all engaged for the evening."

     "I guessed as much."

     "Then, when the row broke out, I had a little moist red paint in the
     palm of my hand. I rushed forward, fell down, clapped my hand to my
     face, and became a piteous spectacle. It is an old trick."

     "That also I could fathom."

     "Then they carried me in. She was bound to have me in. What else
     could she do? And into her sitting-room, which was the very room
     which I suspected. It lay between that and her bedroom, and I was
     determined to see which. They laid me on a couch, I motioned for air,
     they were compelled to open the window, and you had your chance."

     "How did that help you?"

     "It was all-important. When a woman thinks that her house is on fire,
     her instinct is at once to rush to the thing which she values most.
     It is a perfectly overpowering impulse, and I have more than once
     taken advantage of it. In the case of the Darlington substitution
     scandal it was of use to me, and also in the Arnsworth Castle
     business. A married woman grabs at her baby; an unmarried one reaches
     for her jewel-box. Now it was clear to me that our lady of to-day had
     nothing in the house more precious to her than what we are in quest
     of. She would rush to secure it. The alarm of fire was admirably
     done. The smoke and shouting were enough to shake nerves of steel.
     She responded beautifully. The photograph is in a recess behind a
     sliding panel just above the right bell-pull. She was there in an
     instant, and I caught a glimpse of it as she half-drew it out. When I
     cried out that it was a false alarm, she replaced it, glanced at the
     rocket, rushed from the room, and I have not seen her since. I rose,
     and, making my excuses, escaped from the house. I hesitated whether
     to attempt to secure the photograph at once; but the coachman had
     come in, and as he was watching me narrowly it seemed safer to wait.
     A little over-precipitance may ruin all."

     "And now?" I asked.

     "Our quest is practically finished. I shall call with the King
     to-morrow, and with you, if you care to come with us. We will be
     shown into the sitting-room to wait for the lady, but it is probable
     that when she comes she may find neither us nor the photograph. It
     might be a satisfaction to his Majesty to regain it with his own
     hands."

     "And when will you call?"

     "At eight in the morning. She will not be up, so that we shall have a
     clear field. Besides, we must be prompt, for this marriage may mean a
     complete change in her life and habits. I must wire to the King
     without delay."

     We had reached Baker Street and had stopped at the door. He was
     searching his pockets for the key when someone passing said:

     "Good-night, Mister Sherlock Holmes."

     There were several people on the pavement at the time, but the
     greeting appeared to come from a slim youth in an ulster who had
     hurried by.

     "I've heard that voice before," said Holmes, staring down the dimly
     lit street. "Now, I wonder who the deuce that could have been."





          CHAPTER III



     I slept at Baker Street that night, and we were engaged upon our
     toast and coffee in the morning when the King of Bohemia rushed into
     the room.

     "You have really got it!" he cried, grasping Sherlock Holmes by
     either shoulder and looking eagerly into his face.

     "Not yet."

     "But you have hopes?"

     "I have hopes."

     "Then, come. I am all impatience to be gone."

     "We must have a cab."

     "No, my brougham is waiting."

     "Then that will simplify matters." We descended and started off once
     more for Briony Lodge.

     "Irene Adler is married," remarked Holmes.

     "Married! When?"

     "Yesterday."

     "But to whom?"

     "To an English lawyer named Norton."

     "But she could not love him."

     "I am in hopes that she does."

     "And why in hopes?"

     "Because it would spare your Majesty all fear of future annoyance. If
     the lady loves her husband, she does not love your Majesty. If she
     does not love your Majesty, there is no reason why she should
     interfere with your Majesty's plan."

     "It is true. And yet--Well! I wish she had been of my own station!
     What a queen she would have made!" He relapsed into a moody silence,
     which was not broken until we drew up in Serpentine Avenue.

     The door of Briony Lodge was open, and an elderly woman stood upon
     the steps. She watched us with a sardonic eye as we stepped from the
     brougham.

     "Mr. Sherlock Holmes, I believe?" said she.

     "I am Mr. Holmes," answered my companion, looking at her with a
     questioning and rather startled gaze.

     "Indeed! My mistress told me that you were likely to call. She left
     this morning with her husband by the 5.15 train from Charing Cross
     for the Continent."

     "What!" Sherlock Holmes staggered back, white with chagrin and
     surprise. "Do you mean that she has left England?"

     "Never to return."

     "And the papers?" asked the King hoarsely. "All is lost."

     "We shall see." He pushed past the servant and rushed into the
     drawing-room, followed by the King and myself. The furniture was
     scattered about in every direction, with dismantled shelves and open
     drawers, as if the lady had hurriedly ransacked them before her
     flight. Holmes rushed at the bell-pull, tore back a small sliding
     shutter, and, plunging in his hand, pulled out a photograph and a
     letter. The photograph was of Irene Adler herself in evening dress,
     the letter was superscribed to "Sherlock Holmes, Esq. To be left till
     called for." My friend tore it open and we all three read it
     together. It was dated at midnight of the preceding night and ran in
     this way:

     "My dear Mr. Sherlock Holmes:
     "You really did it very well. You took me in completely. Until after
     the alarm of fire, I had not a suspicion. But then, when I found how
     I had betrayed myself, I began to think. I had been warned against
     you months ago. I had been told that if the King employed an agent it
     would certainly be you. And your address had been given me. Yet, with
     all this, you made me reveal what you wanted to know. Even after I
     became suspicious, I found it hard to think evil of such a dear, kind
     old clergyman. But, you know, I have been trained as an actress
     myself. Male costume is nothing new to me. I often take advantage of
     the freedom which it gives. I sent John, the coachman, to watch you,
     ran up stairs, got into my walking-clothes, as I call them, and came
     down just as you departed.
     "Well, I followed you to your door, and so made sure that I was
     really an object of interest to the celebrated Mr. Sherlock Holmes.
     Then I, rather imprudently, wished you good-night, and started for
     the Temple to see my husband.
     "We both thought the best resource was flight, when pursued by so
     formidable an antagonist; so you will find the nest empty when you
     call to-morrow. As to the photograph, your client may rest in peace.
     I love and am loved by a better man than he. The King may do what he
     will without hindrance from one whom he has cruelly wronged. I keep
     it only to safeguard myself, and to preserve a weapon which will
     always secure me from any steps which he might take in the future. I
     leave a photograph which he might care to possess; and I remain, dear
     Mr. Sherlock Holmes,
     "Very truly yours,
     "Irene Norton, ne Adler."

     "What a woman--oh, what a woman!" cried the King of Bohemia, when we
     had all three read this epistle. "Did I not tell you how quick and
     resolute she was? Would she not have made an admirable queen? Is it
     not a pity that she was not on my level?" 

     "From what I have seen of the lady she seems indeed to be on a very
     different level to your Majesty," said Holmes coldly. "I am sorry
     that I have not been able to bring your Majesty's business to a more
     successful conclusion."

     "On the contrary, my dear sir," cried the King; "nothing could be
     more successful. I know that her word is inviolate. The photograph is
     now as safe as if it were in the fire."

     "I am glad to hear your Majesty say so."

     "I am immensely indebted to you. Pray tell me in what way I can
     reward you. This ring--" He slipped an emerald snake ring from his
     finger and held it out upon the palm of his hand.

     "Your Majesty has something which I should value even more highly,"
     said Holmes.

     "You have but to name it."

     "This photograph!"

     The King stared at him in amazement.

     "Irene's photograph!" he cried. "Certainly, if you wish it."

     "I thank your Majesty. Then there is no more to be done in the
     matter. I have the honour to wish you a very good-morning." He bowed,
     and, turning away without observing the hand which the King had
     stretched out to him, he set off in my company for his chambers.

     And that was how a great scandal threatened to affect the kingdom of
     Bohemia, and how the best plans of Mr. Sherlock Holmes were beaten by
     a woman's wit. He used to make merry over the cleverness of women,
     but I have not heard him do it of late. And when he speaks of Irene
     Adler, or when he refers to her photograph, it is always under the
     honourable title of the woman.






                              THE RED-HEADED LEAGUE

     I had called upon my friend, Mr. Sherlock Holmes, one day in the
     autumn of last year and found him in deep conversation with a very
     stout, florid-faced, elderly gentleman with fiery red hair. With an
     apology for my intrusion, I was about to withdraw when Holmes pulled
     me abruptly into the room and closed the door behind me.

     "You could not possibly have come at a better time, my dear Watson,"
     he said cordially.

     "I was afraid that you were engaged."

     "So I am. Very much so."

     "Then I can wait in the next room."

     "Not at all. This gentleman, Mr. Wilson, has been my partner and
     helper in many of my most successful cases, and I have no doubt that
     he will be of the utmost use to me in yours also."

     The stout gentleman half rose from his chair and gave a bob of
     greeting, with a quick little questioning glance from his small
     fat-encircled eyes.

     "Try the settee," said Holmes, relapsing into his armchair and
     putting his fingertips together, as was his custom when in judicial
     moods. "I know, my dear Watson, that you share my love of all that is
     bizarre and outside the conventions and humdrum routine of everyday
     life. You have shown your relish for it by the enthusiasm which has
     prompted you to chronicle, and, if you will excuse my saying so,
     somewhat to embellish so many of my own little adventures."

     "Your cases have indeed been of the greatest interest to me," I
     observed.

     "You will remember that I remarked the other day, just before we went
     into the very simple problem presented by Miss Mary Sutherland, that
     for strange effects and extraordinary combinations we must go to life
     itself, which is always far more daring than any effort of the
     imagination."

     "A proposition which I took the liberty of doubting."

     "You did, Doctor, but none the less you must come round to my view,
     for otherwise I shall keep on piling fact upon fact on you until your
     reason breaks down under them and acknowledges me to be right. Now,
     Mr. Jabez Wilson here has been good enough to call upon me this
     morning, and to begin a narrative which promises to be one of the
     most singular which I have listened to for some time. You have heard
     me remark that the strangest and most unique things are very often
     connected not with the larger but with the smaller crimes, and
     occasionally, indeed, where there is room for doubt whether any
     positive crime has been committed. As far as I have heard it is
     impossible for me to say whether the present case is an instance of
     crime or not, but the course of events is certainly among the most
     singular that I have ever listened to. Perhaps, Mr. Wilson, you would
     have the great kindness to recommence your narrative. I ask you not
     merely because my friend Dr. Watson has not heard the opening part
     but also because the peculiar nature of the story makes me anxious to
     have every possible detail from your lips. As a rule, when I have
     heard some slight indication of the course of events, I am able to
     guide myself by the thousands of other similar cases which occur to
     my memory. In the present instance I am forced to admit that the
     facts are, to the best of my belief, unique."

     The portly client puffed out his chest with an appearance of some
     little pride and pulled a dirty and wrinkled newspaper from the
     inside pocket of his greatcoat. As he glanced down the advertisement
     column, with his head thrust forward and the paper flattened out upon
     his knee, I took a good look at the man and endeavoured, after the
     fashion of my companion, to read the indications which might be
     presented by his dress or appearance.

     I did not gain very much, however, by my inspection. Our visitor bore
     every mark of being an average commonplace British tradesman, obese,
     pompous, and slow. He wore rather baggy grey shepherd's check
     trousers, a not over-clean black frock-coat, unbuttoned in the front,
     and a drab waistcoat with a heavy brassy Albert chain, and a square
     pierced bit of metal dangling down as an ornament. A frayed top-hat
     and a faded brown overcoat with a wrinkled velvet collar lay upon a
     chair beside him. Altogether, look as I would, there was nothing
     remarkable about the man save his blazing red head, and the
     expression of extreme chagrin and discontent upon his features.

     Sherlock Holmes' quick eye took in my occupation, and he shook his
     head with a smile as he noticed my questioning glances. "Beyond the
     obvious facts that he has at some time done manual labour, that he
     takes snuff, that he is a Freemason, that he has been in China, and
     that he has done a considerable amount of writing lately, I can
     deduce nothing else."

     Mr. Jabez Wilson started up in his chair, with his forefinger upon
     the paper, but his eyes upon my companion.

     "How, in the name of good-fortune, did you know all that, Mr.
     Holmes?" he asked. "How did you know, for example, that I did manual
     labour. It's as true as gospel, for I began as a ship's carpenter."

     "Your hands, my dear sir. Your right hand is quite a size larger than
     your left. You have worked with it, and the muscles are more
     developed."

     "Well, the snuff, then, and the Freemasonry?"

     "I won't insult your intelligence by telling you how I read that,
     especially as, rather against the strict rules of your order, you use
     an arc-and-compass breastpin."

     "Ah, of course, I forgot that. But the writing?"

     "What else can be indicated by that right cuff so very shiny for five
     inches, and the left one with the smooth patch near the elbow where
     you rest it upon the desk?"

     "Well, but China?"

     "The fish that you have tattooed immediately above your right wrist
     could only have been done in China. I have made a small study of
     tattoo marks and have even contributed to the literature of the
     subject. That trick of staining the fishes' scales of a delicate pink
     is quite peculiar to China. When, in addition, I see a Chinese coin
     hanging from your watch-chain, the matter becomes even more simple."

     Mr. Jabez Wilson laughed heavily. "Well, I never!" said he. "I
     thought at first that you had done something clever, but I see that
     there was nothing in it, after all."

     "I begin to think, Watson," said Holmes, "that I make a mistake in
     explaining. 'Omne ignotum pro magnifico,' you know, and my poor
     little reputation, such as it is, will suffer shipwreck if I am so
     candid. Can you not find the advertisement, Mr. Wilson?"

     "Yes, I have got it now," he answered with his thick red finger
     planted halfway down the column. "Here it is. This is what began it
     all. You just read it for yourself, sir."

     I took the paper from him and read as follows:

     "To the Red-headed League: On account of the bequest of the late
     Ezekiah Hopkins, of Lebanon, Pennsylvania, U. S. A., there is now
     another vacancy open which entitles a member of the League to a
     salary of ? a week for purely nominal services. All red-headed men
     who are sound in body and mind and above the age of twenty-one years,
     are eligible. Apply in person on Monday, at eleven o'clock, to Duncan
     Ross, at the offices of the League, 7 Pope's Court, Fleet Street."

     "What on earth does this mean?" I ejaculated after I had twice read
     over the extraordinary announcement.

     Holmes chuckled and wriggled in his chair, as was his habit when in
     high spirits. "It is a little off the beaten track, isn't it?" said
     he. "And now, Mr. Wilson, off you go at scratch and tell us all about
     yourself, your household, and the effect which this advertisement had
     upon your fortunes. You will first make a note, Doctor, of the paper
     and the date."

     "It is The Morning Chronicle of April 27, 1890. Just two months ago."

     "Very good. Now, Mr. Wilson?"

     "Well, it is just as I have been telling you, Mr. Sherlock Holmes,"
     said Jabez Wilson, mopping his forehead; "I have a small pawnbroker's
     business at Coburg Square, near the City. It's not a very large
     affair, and of late years it has not done more than just give me a
     living. I used to be able to keep two assistants, but now I only keep
     one; and I would have a job to pay him but that he is willing to come
     for half wages so as to learn the business."

     "What is the name of this obliging youth?" asked Sherlock Holmes.

     "His name is Vincent Spaulding, and he's not such a youth, either.
     It's hard to say his age. I should not wish a smarter assistant, Mr.
     Holmes; and I know very well that he could better himself and earn
     twice what I am able to give him. But, after all, if he is satisfied,
     why should I put ideas in his head?"

     "Why, indeed? You seem most fortunate in having an employee who comes
     under the full market price. It is not a common experience among
     employers in this age. I don't know that your assistant is not as
     remarkable as your advertisement."

     "Oh, he has his faults, too," said Mr. Wilson. "Never was such a
     fellow for photography. Snapping away with a camera when he ought to
     be improving his mind, and then diving down into the cellar like a
     rabbit into its hole to develop his pictures. That is his main fault,
     but on the whole he's a good worker. There's no vice in him."

     "He is still with you, I presume?"

     "Yes, sir. He and a girl of fourteen, who does a bit of simple
     cooking and keeps the place clean--that's all I have in the house,
     for I am a widower and never had any family. We live very quietly,
     sir, the three of us; and we keep a roof over our heads and pay our
     debts, if we do nothing more.

     "The first thing that put us out was that advertisement. Spaulding,
     he came down into the office just this day eight weeks, with this
     very paper in his hand, and he says:

     "'I wish to the Lord, Mr. Wilson, that I was a red-headed man.'

     "'Why that?' I asks.

     "'Why,' says he, 'here's another vacancy on the League of the
     Red-headed Men. It's worth quite a little fortune to any man who gets
     it, and I understand that there are more vacancies than there are
     men, so that the trustees are at their wits' end what to do with the
     money. If my hair would only change colour, here's a nice little crib
     all ready for me to step into.'

     "'Why, what is it, then?' I asked. You see, Mr. Holmes, I am a very
     stay-at-home man, and as my business came to me instead of my having
     to go to it, I was often weeks on end without putting my foot over
     the door-mat. In that way I didn't know much of what was going on
     outside, and I was always glad of a bit of news.

     "'Have you never heard of the League of the Red-headed Men?' he asked
     with his eyes open.

     "'Never.'

     "'Why, I wonder at that, for you are eligible yourself for one of the
     vacancies.'

     "'And what are they worth?' I asked.

     "'Oh, merely a couple of hundred a year, but the work is slight, and
     it need not interfere very much with one's other occupations.'

     "Well, you can easily think that that made me prick up my ears, for
     the business has not been over-good for some years, and an extra
     couple of hundred would have been very handy.

     "'Tell me all about it,' said I.

     "'Well,' said he, showing me the advertisement, 'you can see for
     yourself that the League has a vacancy, and there is the address
     where you should apply for particulars. As far as I can make out, the
     League was founded by an American millionaire, Ezekiah Hopkins, who
     was very peculiar in his ways. He was himself red-headed, and he had
     a great sympathy for all red-headed men; so when he died it was found
     that he had left his enormous fortune in the hands of trustees, with
     instructions to apply the interest to the providing of easy berths to
     men whose hair is of that colour. From all I hear it is splendid pay
     and very little to do.'

     "'But,' said I, 'there would be millions of red-headed men who would
     apply.'

     "'Not so many as you might think,' he answered. 'You see it is really
     confined to Londoners, and to grown men. This American had started
     from London when he was young, and he wanted to do the old town a
     good turn. Then, again, I have heard it is no use your applying if
     your hair is light red, or dark red, or anything but real bright,
     blazing, fiery red. Now, if you cared to apply, Mr. Wilson, you would
     just walk in; but perhaps it would hardly be worth your while to put
     yourself out of the way for the sake of a few hundred pounds.'

     "Now, it is a fact, gentlemen, as you may see for yourselves, that my
     hair is of a very full and rich tint, so that it seemed to me that if
     there was to be any competition in the matter I stood as good a
     chance as any man that I had ever met. Vincent Spaulding seemed to
     know so much about it that I thought he might prove useful, so I just
     ordered him to put up the shutters for the day and to come right away
     with me. He was very willing to have a holiday, so we shut the
     business up and started off for the address that was given us in the
     advertisement.

     "I never hope to see such a sight as that again, Mr. Holmes. From
     north, south, east, and west every man who had a shade of red in his
     hair had tramped into the city to answer the advertisement. Fleet
     Street was choked with red-headed folk, and Pope's Court looked like
     a coster's orange barrow. I should not have thought there were so
     many in the whole country as were brought together by that single
     advertisement. Every shade of colour they were--straw, lemon, orange,
     brick, Irish-setter, liver, clay; but, as Spaulding said, there were
     not many who had the real vivid flame-coloured tint. When I saw how
     many were waiting, I would have given it up in despair; but Spaulding
     would not hear of it. How he did it I could not imagine, but he
     pushed and pulled and butted until he got me through the crowd, and
     right up to the steps which led to the office. There was a double
     stream upon the stair, some going up in hope, and some coming back
     dejected; but we wedged in as well as we could and soon found
     ourselves in the office."

     "Your experience has been a most entertaining one," remarked Holmes
     as his client paused and refreshed his memory with a huge pinch of
     snuff. "Pray continue your very interesting statement."

     "There was nothing in the office but a couple of wooden chairs and a
     deal table, behind which sat a small man with a head that was even
     redder than mine. He said a few words to each candidate as he came
     up, and then he always managed to find some fault in them which would
     disqualify them. Getting a vacancy did not seem to be such a very
     easy matter, after all. However, when our turn came the little man
     was much more favourable to me than to any of the others, and he
     closed the door as we entered, so that he might have a private word
     with us.

     "'This is Mr. Jabez Wilson,' said my assistant, 'and he is willing to
     fill a vacancy in the League.'

     "'And he is admirably suited for it,' the other answered. 'He has
     every requirement. I cannot recall when I have seen anything so
     fine.' He took a step backward, cocked his head on one side, and
     gazed at my hair until I felt quite bashful. Then suddenly he plunged
     forward, wrung my hand, and congratulated me warmly on my success.

     "'It would be injustice to hesitate,' said he. 'You will, however, I
     am sure, excuse me for taking an obvious precaution.' With that he
     seized my hair in both his hands, and tugged until I yelled with the
     pain. 'There is water in your eyes,' said he as he released me. 'I
     perceive that all is as it should be. But we have to be careful, for
     we have twice been deceived by wigs and once by paint. I could tell
     you tales of cobbler's wax which would disgust you with human
     nature.' He stepped over to the window and shouted through it at the
     top of his voice that the vacancy was filled. A groan of
     disappointment came up from below, and the folk all trooped away in
     different directions until there was not a red-head to be seen except
     my own and that of the manager.

     "'My name,' said he, 'is Mr. Duncan Ross, and I am myself one of the
     pensioners upon the fund left by our noble benefactor. Are you a
     married man, Mr. Wilson? Have you a family?'

     "I answered that I had not.

     "His face fell immediately.

     "'Dear me!' he said gravely, 'that is very serious indeed! I am sorry
     to hear you say that. The fund was, of course, for the propagation
     and spread of the red-heads as well as for their maintenance. It is
     exceedingly unfortunate that you should be a bachelor.'

     "My face lengthened at this, Mr. Holmes, for I thought that I was not
     to have the vacancy after all; but after thinking it over for a few
     minutes he said that it would be all right.

     "'In the case of another,' said he, 'the objection might be fatal,
     but we must stretch a point in favour of a man with such a head of
     hair as yours. When shall you be able to enter upon your new duties?'

     "'Well, it is a little awkward, for I have a business already,' said
     I.

     "'Oh, never mind about that, Mr. Wilson!' said Vincent Spaulding. 'I
     should be able to look after that for you.'

     "'What would be the hours?' I asked.

     "'Ten to two.'

     "Now a pawnbroker's business is mostly done of an evening, Mr.
     Holmes, especially Thursday and Friday evening, which is just before
     pay-day; so it would suit me very well to earn a little in the
     mornings. Besides, I knew that my assistant was a good man, and that
     he would see to anything that turned up.

     "'That would suit me very well,' said I. 'And the pay?'

     "'Is ? a week.'

     "'And the work?'

     "'Is purely nominal.'

     "'What do you call purely nominal?'

     "'Well, you have to be in the office, or at least in the building,
     the whole time. If you leave, you forfeit your whole position
     forever. The will is very clear upon that point. You don't comply
     with the conditions if you budge from the office during that time.'

     "'It's only four hours a day, and I should not think of leaving,'
     said I.

     "'No excuse will avail,' said Mr. Duncan Ross; 'neither sickness nor
     business nor anything else. There you must stay, or you lose your
     billet.'

     "'And the work?'

     "'Is to copy out the "Encyclopaedia Britannica." There is the first
     volume of it in that press. You must find your own ink, pens, and
     blotting-paper, but we provide this table and chair. Will you be
     ready to-morrow?'

     "'Certainly,' I answered.

     "'Then, good-bye, Mr. Jabez Wilson, and let me congratulate you once
     more on the important position which you have been fortunate enough
     to gain.' He bowed me out of the room and I went home with my
     assistant, hardly knowing what to say or do, I was so pleased at my
     own good fortune.

     "Well, I thought over the matter all day, and by evening I was in low
     spirits again; for I had quite persuaded myself that the whole affair
     must be some great hoax or fraud, though what its object might be I
     could not imagine. It seemed altogether past belief that anyone could
     make such a will, or that they would pay such a sum for doing
     anything so simple as copying out the 'Encyclopaedia Britannica.'
     Vincent Spaulding did what he could to cheer me up, but by bedtime I
     had reasoned myself out of the whole thing. However, in the morning I
     determined to have a look at it anyhow, so I bought a penny bottle of
     ink, and with a quill-pen, and seven sheets of foolscap paper, I
     started off for Pope's Court.

     "Well, to my surprise and delight, everything was as right as
     possible. The table was set out ready for me, and Mr. Duncan Ross was
     there to see that I got fairly to work. He started me off upon the
     letter A, and then he left me; but he would drop in from time to time
     to see that all was right with me. At two o'clock he bade me
     good-day, complimented me upon the amount that I had written, and
     locked the door of the office after me.

     "This went on day after day, Mr. Holmes, and on Saturday the manager
     came in and planked down four golden sovereigns for my week's work.
     It was the same next week, and the same the week after. Every morning
     I was there at ten, and every afternoon I left at two. By degrees Mr.
     Duncan Ross took to coming in only once of a morning, and then, after
     a time, he did not come in at all. Still, of course, I never dared to
     leave the room for an instant, for I was not sure when he might come,
     and the billet was such a good one, and suited me so well, that I
     would not risk the loss of it.

     "Eight weeks passed away like this, and I had written about Abbots
     and Archery and Armour and Architecture and Attica, and hoped with
     diligence that I might get on to the B's before very long. It cost me
     something in foolscap, and I had pretty nearly filled a shelf with my
     writings. And then suddenly the whole business came to an end."

     "To an end?"

     "Yes, sir. And no later than this morning. I went to my work as usual
     at ten o'clock, but the door was shut and locked, with a little
     square of cardboard hammered on to the middle of the panel with a
     tack. Here it is, and you can read for yourself."

     He held up a piece of white cardboard about the size of a sheet of
     note-paper. It read in this fashion:

                              The Red-headed League
                                       is
                                    Dissolved
                                October 9, 1890.

     Sherlock Holmes and I surveyed this curt announcement and the rueful
     face behind it, until the comical side of the affair so completely
     overtopped every other consideration that we both burst out into a
     roar of laughter.

     "I cannot see that there is anything very funny," cried our client,
     flushing up to the roots of his flaming head. "If you can do nothing
     better than laugh at me, I can go elsewhere."

     "No, no," cried Holmes, shoving him back into the chair from which he
     had half risen. "I really wouldn't miss your case for the world. It
     is most refreshingly unusual. But there is, if you will excuse my
     saying so, something just a little funny about it. Pray what steps
     did you take when you found the card upon the door?"

     "I was staggered, sir. I did not know what to do. Then I called at
     the offices round, but none of them seemed to know anything about it.
     Finally, I went to the landlord, who is an accountant living on the
     ground-floor, and I asked him if he could tell me what had become of
     the Red-headed League. He said that he had never heard of any such
     body. Then I asked him who Mr. Duncan Ross was. He answered that the
     name was new to him.

     "'Well,' said I, 'the gentleman at No. 4.'

     "'What, the red-headed man?'

     "'Yes.'

     "'Oh,' said he, 'his name was William Morris. He was a solicitor and
     was using my room as a temporary convenience until his new premises
     were ready. He moved out yesterday.'

     "'Where could I find him?'

     "'Oh, at his new offices. He did tell me the address. Yes, 17 King
     Edward Street, near St. Paul's.'

     "I started off, Mr. Holmes, but when I got to that address it was a
     manufactory of artificial knee-caps, and no one in it had ever heard
     of either Mr. William Morris or Mr. Duncan Ross."

     "And what did you do then?" asked Holmes.

     "I went home to Saxe-Coburg Square, and I took the advice of my
     assistant. But he could not help me in any way. He could only say
     that if I waited I should hear by post. But that was not quite good
     enough, Mr. Holmes. I did not wish to lose such a place without a
     struggle, so, as I had heard that you were good enough to give advice
     to poor folk who were in need of it, I came right away to you."

     "And you did very wisely," said Holmes. "Your case is an exceedingly
     remarkable one, and I shall be happy to look into it. From what you
     have told me I think that it is possible that graver issues hang from
     it than might at first sight appear."

     "Grave enough!" said Mr. Jabez Wilson. "Why, I have lost four pound a
     week."

     "As far as you are personally concerned," remarked Holmes, "I do not
     see that you have any grievance against this extraordinary league. On
     the contrary, you are, as I understand, richer by some ?0, to say
     nothing of the minute knowledge which you have gained on every
     subject which comes under the letter A. You have lost nothing by
     them."

     "No, sir. But I want to find out about them, and who they are, and
     what their object was in playing this prank--if it was a prank--upon
     me. It was a pretty expensive joke for them, for it cost them two and
     thirty pounds."

     "We shall endeavour to clear up these points for you. And, first, one
     or two questions, Mr. Wilson. This assistant of yours who first
     called your attention to the advertisement--how long had he been with
     you?"

     "About a month then."

     "How did he come?"

     "In answer to an advertisement."

     "Was he the only applicant?"

     "No, I had a dozen."

     "Why did you pick him?"

     "Because he was handy and would come cheap."

     "At half-wages, in fact."

     "Yes."

     "What is he like, this Vincent Spaulding?"

     "Small, stout-built, very quick in his ways, no hair on his face,
     though he's not short of thirty. Has a white splash of acid upon his
     forehead."

     Holmes sat up in his chair in considerable excitement. "I thought as
     much," said he. "Have you ever observed that his ears are pierced for
     earrings?"

     "Yes, sir. He told me that a gipsy had done it for him when he was a
     lad."

     "Hum!" said Holmes, sinking back in deep thought. "He is still with
     you?"

     "Oh, yes, sir; I have only just left him."

     "And has your business been attended to in your absence?"

     "Nothing to complain of, sir. There's never very much to do of a
     morning."

     "That will do, Mr. Wilson. I shall be happy to give you an opinion
     upon the subject in the course of a day or two. To-day is Saturday,
     and I hope that by Monday we may come to a conclusion."

     "Well, Watson," said Holmes when our visitor had left us, "what do
     you make of it all?"

     "I make nothing of it," I answered frankly. "It is a most mysterious
     business."

     "As a rule," said Holmes, "the more bizarre a thing is the less
     mysterious it proves to be. It is your commonplace, featureless
     crimes which are really puzzling, just as a commonplace face is the
     most difficult to identify. But I must be prompt over this matter."

     "What are you going to do, then?" I asked.

     "To smoke," he answered. "It is quite a three pipe problem, and I beg
     that you won't speak to me for fifty minutes." He curled himself up
     in his chair, with his thin knees drawn up to his hawk-like nose, and
     there he sat with his eyes closed and his black clay pipe thrusting
     out like the bill of some strange bird. I had come to the conclusion
     that he had dropped asleep, and indeed was nodding myself, when he
     suddenly sprang out of his chair with the gesture of a man who has
     made up his mind and put his pipe down upon the mantelpiece.

     "Sarasate plays at the St. James's Hall this afternoon," he remarked.
     "What do you think, Watson? Could your patients spare you for a few
     hours?"

     "I have nothing to do to-day. My practice is never very absorbing."

     "Then put on your hat and come. I am going through the City first,
     and we can have some lunch on the way. I observe that there is a good
     deal of German music on the programme, which is rather more to my
     taste than Italian or French. It is introspective, and I want to
     introspect. Come along!"

     We travelled by the Underground as far as Aldersgate; and a short
     walk took us to Saxe-Coburg Square, the scene of the singular story
     which we had listened to in the morning. It was a poky, little,
     shabby-genteel place, where four lines of dingy two-storied brick
     houses looked out into a small railed-in enclosure, where a lawn of
     weedy grass and a few clumps of faded laurel-bushes made a hard fight
     against a smoke-laden and uncongenial atmosphere. Three gilt balls
     and a brown board with "Jabez Wilson" in white letters, upon a corner
     house, announced the place where our red-headed client carried on his
     business. Sherlock Holmes stopped in front of it with his head on one
     side and looked it all over, with his eyes shining brightly between
     puckered lids. Then he walked slowly up the street, and then down
     again to the corner, still looking keenly at the houses. Finally he
     returned to the pawnbroker's, and, having thumped vigorously upon the
     pavement with his stick two or three times, he went up to the door
     and knocked. It was instantly opened by a bright-looking,
     clean-shaven young fellow, who asked him to step in.

     "Thank you," said Holmes, "I only wished to ask you how you would go
     from here to the Strand."

     "Third right, fourth left," answered the assistant promptly, closing
     the door.

     "Smart fellow, that," observed Holmes as we walked away. "He is, in
     my judgment, the fourth smartest man in London, and for daring I am
     not sure that he has not a claim to be third. I have known something
     of him before."

     "Evidently," said I, "Mr. Wilson's assistant counts for a good deal
     in this mystery of the Red-headed League. I am sure that you inquired
     your way merely in order that you might see him."

     "Not him."

     "What then?"

     "The knees of his trousers."

     "And what did you see?"

     "What I expected to see."

     "Why did you beat the pavement?"

     "My dear doctor, this is a time for observation, not for talk. We are
     spies in an enemy's country. We know something of Saxe-Coburg Square.
     Let us now explore the parts which lie behind it."

     The road in which we found ourselves as we turned round the corner
     from the retired Saxe-Coburg Square presented as great a contrast to
     it as the front of a picture does to the back. It was one of the main
     arteries which conveyed the traffic of the City to the north and
     west. The roadway was blocked with the immense stream of commerce
     flowing in a double tide inward and outward, while the footpaths were
     black with the hurrying swarm of pedestrians. It was difficult to
     realise as we looked at the line of fine shops and stately business
     premises that they really abutted on the other side upon the faded
     and stagnant square which we had just quitted.

     "Let me see," said Holmes, standing at the corner and glancing along
     the line, "I should like just to remember the order of the houses
     here. It is a hobby of mine to have an exact knowledge of London.
     There is Mortimer's, the tobacconist, the little newspaper shop, the
     Coburg branch of the City and Suburban Bank, the Vegetarian
     Restaurant, and McFarlane's carriage-building depot. That carries us
     right on to the other block. And now, Doctor, we've done our work, so
     it's time we had some play. A sandwich and a cup of coffee, and then
     off to violin-land, where all is sweetness and delicacy and harmony,
     and there are no red-headed clients to vex us with their conundrums."

     My friend was an enthusiastic musician, being himself not only a very
     capable performer but a composer of no ordinary merit. All the
     afternoon he sat in the stalls wrapped in the most perfect happiness,
     gently waving his long, thin fingers in time to the music, while his
     gently smiling face and his languid, dreamy eyes were as unlike those
     of Holmes the sleuth-hound, Holmes the relentless, keen-witted,
     ready-handed criminal agent, as it was possible to conceive. In his
     singular character the dual nature alternately asserted itself, and
     his extreme exactness and astuteness represented, as I have often
     thought, the reaction against the poetic and contemplative mood which
     occasionally predominated in him. The swing of his nature took him
     from extreme languor to devouring energy; and, as I knew well, he was
     never so truly formidable as when, for days on end, he had been
     lounging in his armchair amid his improvisations and his black-letter
     editions. Then it was that the lust of the chase would suddenly come
     upon him, and that his brilliant reasoning power would rise to the
     level of intuition, until those who were unacquainted with his
     methods would look askance at him as on a man whose knowledge was not
     that of other mortals. When I saw him that afternoon so enwrapped in
     the music at St. James's Hall I felt that an evil time might be
     coming upon those whom he had set himself to hunt down.

     "You want to go home, no doubt, Doctor," he remarked as we emerged.

     "Yes, it would be as well."

     "And I have some business to do which will take some hours. This
     business at Coburg Square is serious."

     "Why serious?"

     "A considerable crime is in contemplation. I have every reason to
     believe that we shall be in time to stop it. But to-day being
     Saturday rather complicates matters. I shall want your help
     to-night."

     "At what time?"

     "Ten will be early enough."

     "I shall be at Baker Street at ten."

     "Very well. And, I say, Doctor, there may be some little danger, so
     kindly put your army revolver in your pocket." He waved his hand,
     turned on his heel, and disappeared in an instant among the crowd.

     I trust that I am not more dense than my neighbours, but I was always
     oppressed with a sense of my own stupidity in my dealings with
     Sherlock Holmes. Here I had heard what he had heard, I had seen what
     he had seen, and yet from his words it was evident that he saw
     clearly not only what had happened but what was about to happen,
     while to me the whole business was still confused and grotesque. As I
     drove home to my house in Kensington I thought over it all, from the
     extraordinary story of the red-headed copier of the "Encyclopaedia"
     down to the visit to Saxe-Coburg Square, and the ominous words with
     which he had parted from me. What was this nocturnal expedition, and
     why should I go armed?  Where were we going, and what were we to do?
     I had the hint from Holmes that this smooth-faced pawnbroker's
     assistant was a formidable man--a man who might play a deep game. I
     tried to puzzle it out, but gave it up in despair and set the matter
     aside until night should bring an explanation.

     It was a quarter-past nine when I started from home and made my way
     across the Park, and so through Oxford Street to Baker Street. Two
     hansoms were standing at the door, and as I entered the passage I
     heard the sound of voices from above. On entering his room I found
     Holmes in animated conversation with two men, one of whom I
     recognised as Peter Jones, the official police agent, while the other
     was a long, thin, sad-faced man, with a very shiny hat and
     oppressively respectable frock-coat.

     "Ha! Our party is complete," said Holmes, buttoning up his pea-jacket
     and taking his heavy hunting crop from the rack. "Watson, I think you
     know Mr. Jones, of Scotland Yard? Let me introduce you to Mr.
     Merryweather, who is to be our companion in to-night's adventure."

     "We're hunting in couples again, Doctor, you see," said Jones in his
     consequential way. "Our friend here is a wonderful man for starting a
     chase. All he wants is an old dog to help him to do the running
     down."

     "I hope a wild goose may not prove to be the end of our chase,"
     observed Mr. Merryweather gloomily.

     "You may place considerable confidence in Mr. Holmes, sir," said the
     police agent loftily. "He has his own little methods, which are, if
     he won't mind my saying so, just a little too theoretical and
     fantastic, but he has the makings of a detective in him. It is not
     too much to say that once or twice, as in that business of the Sholto
     murder and the Agra treasure, he has been more nearly correct than
     the official force."

     "Oh, if you say so, Mr. Jones, it is all right," said the stranger
     with deference. "Still, I confess that I miss my rubber. It is the
     first Saturday night for seven-and-twenty years that I have not had
     my rubber."

     "I think you will find," said Sherlock Holmes, "that you will play
     for a higher stake to-night than you have ever done yet, and that the
     play will be more exciting. For you, Mr. Merryweather, the stake will
     be some ?0,000; and for you, Jones, it will be the man upon whom you
     wish to lay your hands."

     "John Clay, the murderer, thief, smasher, and forger. He's a young
     man, Mr. Merryweather, but he is at the head of his profession, and I
     would rather have my bracelets on him than on any criminal in London.
     He's a remarkable man, is young John Clay. His grandfather was a
     royal duke, and he himself has been to Eton and Oxford. His brain is
     as cunning as his fingers, and though we meet signs of him at every
     turn, we never know where to find the man himself. He'll crack a crib
     in Scotland one week, and be raising money to build an orphanage in
     Cornwall the next. I've been on his track for years and have never
     set eyes on him yet."

     "I hope that I may have the pleasure of introducing you to-night.
     I've had one or two little turns also with Mr. John Clay, and I agree
     with you that he is at the head of his profession. It is past ten,
     however, and quite time that we started. If you two will take the
     first hansom, Watson and I will follow in the second."

     Sherlock Holmes was not very communicative during the long drive and
     lay back in the cab humming the tunes which he had heard in the
     afternoon. We rattled through an endless labyrinth of gas-lit streets
     until we emerged into Farrington Street.

     "We are close there now," my friend remarked. "This fellow
     Merryweather is a bank director, and personally interested in the
     matter. I thought it as well to have Jones with us also. He is not a
     bad fellow, though an absolute imbecile in his profession. He has one
     positive virtue. He is as brave as a bulldog and as tenacious as a
     lobster if he gets his claws upon anyone. Here we are, and they are
     waiting for us."

     We had reached the same crowded thoroughfare in which we had found
     ourselves in the morning. Our cabs were dismissed, and, following the
     guidance of Mr. Merryweather, we passed down a narrow passage and
     through a side door, which he opened for us. Within there was a small
     corridor, which ended in a very massive iron gate. This also was
     opened, and led down a flight of winding stone steps, which
     terminated at another formidable gate. Mr. Merryweather stopped to
     light a lantern, and then conducted us down a dark, earth-smelling
     passage, and so, after opening a third door, into a huge vault or
     cellar, which was piled all round with crates and massive boxes.

     "You are not very vulnerable from above," Holmes remarked as he held
     up the lantern and gazed about him.

     "Nor from below," said Mr. Merryweather, striking his stick upon the
     flags which lined the floor. "Why, dear me, it sounds quite hollow!"
     he remarked, looking up in surprise.

     "I must really ask you to be a little more quiet!" said Holmes
     severely. "You have already imperilled the whole success of our
     expedition. Might I beg that you would have the goodness to sit down
     upon one of those boxes, and not to interfere?"

     The solemn Mr. Merryweather perched himself upon a crate, with a very
     injured expression upon his face, while Holmes fell upon his knees
     upon the floor and, with the lantern and a magnifying lens, began to
     examine minutely the cracks between the stones. A few seconds
     sufficed to satisfy him, for he sprang to his feet again and put his
     glass in his pocket.

     "We have at least an hour before us," he remarked, "for they can
     hardly take any steps until the good pawnbroker is safely in bed.
     Then they will not lose a minute, for the sooner they do their work
     the longer time they will have for their escape. We are at present,
     Doctor--as no doubt you have divined--in the cellar of the City
     branch of one of the principal London banks. Mr. Merryweather is the
     chairman of directors, and he will explain to you that there are
     reasons why the more daring criminals of London should take a
     considerable interest in this cellar at present."

     "It is our French gold," whispered the director. "We have had several
     warnings that an attempt might be made upon it."

     "Your French gold?"

     "Yes. We had occasion some months ago to strengthen our resources and
     borrowed for that purpose 30,000 napoleons from the Bank of France.
     It has become known that we have never had occasion to unpack the
     money, and that it is still lying in our cellar. The crate upon which
     I sit contains 2,000 napoleons packed between layers of lead foil.
     Our reserve of bullion is much larger at present than is usually kept
     in a single branch office, and the directors have had misgivings upon
     the subject."

     "Which were very well justified," observed Holmes. "And now it is
     time that we arranged our little plans. I expect that within an hour
     matters will come to a head. In the meantime Mr. Merryweather, we
     must put the screen over that dark lantern."

     "And sit in the dark?"

     "I am afraid so. I had brought a pack of cards in my pocket, and I
     thought that, as we were a partie carre, you might have your rubber
     after all. But I see that the enemy's preparations have gone so far
     that we cannot risk the presence of a light. And, first of all, we
     must choose our positions. These are daring men, and though we shall
     take them at a disadvantage, they may do us some harm unless we are
     careful. I shall stand behind this crate, and do you conceal
     yourselves behind those. Then, when I flash a light upon them, close
     in swiftly. If they fire, Watson, have no compunction about shooting
     them down."

     I placed my revolver, cocked, upon the top of the wooden case behind
     which I crouched. Holmes shot the slide across the front of his
     lantern and left us in pitch darkness--such an absolute darkness as I
     have never before experienced. The smell of hot metal remained to
     assure us that the light was still there, ready to flash out at a
     moment's notice. To me, with my nerves worked up to a pitch of
     expectancy, there was something depressing and subduing in the sudden
     gloom, and in the cold dank air of the vault.

     "They have but one retreat," whispered Holmes. "That is back through
     the house into Saxe-Coburg Square. I hope that you have done what I
     asked you, Jones?"

     "I have an inspector and two officers waiting at the front door."

     "Then we have stopped all the holes. And now we must be silent and
     wait."

     What a time it seemed! From comparing notes afterwards it was but an
     hour and a quarter, yet it appeared to me that the night must have
     almost gone and the dawn be breaking above us. My limbs were weary
     and stiff, for I feared to change my position; yet my nerves were
     worked up to the highest pitch of tension, and my hearing was so
     acute that I could not only hear the gentle breathing of my
     companions, but I could distinguish the deeper, heavier in-breath of
     the bulky Jones from the thin, sighing note of the bank director.
     From my position I could look over the case in the direction of the
     floor. Suddenly my eyes caught the glint of a light.

     At first it was but a lurid spark upon the stone pavement. Then it
     lengthened out until it became a yellow line, and then, without any
     warning or sound, a gash seemed to open and a hand appeared, a white,
     almost womanly hand, which felt about in the centre of the little
     area of light. For a minute or more the hand, with its writhing
     fingers, protruded out of the floor. Then it was withdrawn as
     suddenly as it appeared, and all was dark again save the single lurid
     spark which marked a chink between the stones.

     Its disappearance, however, was but momentary. With a rending,
     tearing sound, one of the broad, white stones turned over upon its
     side and left a square, gaping hole, through which streamed the light
     of a lantern. Over the edge there peeped a clean-cut, boyish face,
     which looked keenly about it, and then, with a hand on either side of
     the aperture, drew itself shoulder-high and waist-high, until one
     knee rested upon the edge. In another instant he stood at the side of
     the hole and was hauling after him a companion, lithe and small like
     himself, with a pale face and a shock of very red hair.

     "It's all clear," he whispered. "Have you the chisel and the bags?
     Great Scott! Jump, Archie, jump, and I'll swing for it!"

     Sherlock Holmes had sprung out and seized the intruder by the collar.
     The other dived down the hole, and I heard the sound of rending cloth
     as Jones clutched at his skirts. The light flashed upon the barrel of
     a revolver, but Holmes' hunting crop came down on the man's wrist,
     and the pistol clinked upon the stone floor.

     "It's no use, John Clay," said Holmes blandly. "You have no chance at
     all."

     "So I see," the other answered with the utmost coolness. "I fancy
     that my pal is all right, though I see you have got his coat-tails."

     "There are three men waiting for him at the door," said Holmes.

     "Oh, indeed! You seem to have done the thing very completely. I must
     compliment you."

     "And I you," Holmes answered. "Your red-headed idea was very new and
     effective."

     "You'll see your pal again presently," said Jones. "He's quicker at
     climbing down holes than I am. Just hold out while I fix the
     derbies."

     "I beg that you will not touch me with your filthy hands," remarked
     our prisoner as the handcuffs clattered upon his wrists. "You may not
     be aware that I have royal blood in my veins. Have the goodness,
     also, when you address me always to say 'sir' and 'please.'"

     "All right," said Jones with a stare and a snigger. "Well, would you
     please, sir, march upstairs, where we can get a cab to carry your
     Highness to the police-station?"

     "That is better," said John Clay serenely. He made a sweeping bow to
     the three of us and walked quietly off in the custody of the
     detective.

     "Really, Mr. Holmes," said Mr. Merryweather as we followed them from
     the cellar, "I do not know how the bank can thank you or repay you.
     There is no doubt that you have detected and defeated in the most
     complete manner one of the most determined attempts at bank robbery
     that have ever come within my experience."

     "I have had one or two little scores of my own to settle with Mr.
     John Clay," said Holmes. "I have been at some small expense over this
     matter, which I shall expect the bank to refund, but beyond that I am
     amply repaid by having had an experience which is in many ways
     unique, and by hearing the very remarkable narrative of the
     Red-headed League."

     "You see, Watson," he explained in the early hours of the morning as
     we sat over a glass of whisky and soda in Baker Street, "it was
     perfectly obvious from the first that the only possible object of
     this rather fantastic business of the advertisement of the League,
     and the copying of the 'Encyclopaedia,' must be to get this not
     over-bright pawnbroker out of the way for a number of hours every
     day. It was a curious way of managing it, but, really, it would be
     difficult to suggest a better. The method was no doubt suggested to
     Clay's ingenious mind by the colour of his accomplice's hair. The ?
     a week was a lure which must draw him, and what was it to them, who
     were playing for thousands? They put in the advertisement, one rogue
     has the temporary office, the other rogue incites the man to apply
     for it, and together they manage to secure his absence every morning
     in the week. From the time that I heard of the assistant having come
     for half wages, it was obvious to me that he had some strong motive
     for securing the situation."

     "But how could you guess what the motive was?"

     "Had there been women in the house, I should have suspected a mere
     vulgar intrigue. That, however, was out of the question. The man's
     business was a small one, and there was nothing in his house which
     could account for such elaborate preparations, and such an
     expenditure as they were at. It must, then, be something out of the
     house. What could it be? I thought of the assistant's fondness for
     photography, and his trick of vanishing into the cellar. The cellar!
     There was the end of this tangled clue. Then I made inquiries as to
     this mysterious assistant and found that I had to deal with one of
     the coolest and most daring criminals in London. He was doing
     something in the cellar--something which took many hours a day for
     months on end. What could it be, once more? I could think of nothing
     save that he was running a tunnel to some other building.

     "So far I had got when we went to visit the scene of action. I
     surprised you by beating upon the pavement with my stick. I was
     ascertaining whether the cellar stretched out in front or behind. It
     was not in front. Then I rang the bell, and, as I hoped, the
     assistant answered it. We have had some skirmishes, but we had never
     set eyes upon each other before. I hardly looked at his face. His
     knees were what I wished to see. You must yourself have remarked how
     worn, wrinkled, and stained they were. They spoke of those hours of
     burrowing. The only remaining point was what they were burrowing for.
     I walked round the corner, saw the City and Suburban Bank abutted on
     our friend's premises, and felt that I had solved my problem. When
     you drove home after the concert I called upon Scotland Yard and upon
     the chairman of the bank directors, with the result that you have
     seen."

     "And how could you tell that they would make their attempt to-night?"
     I asked.

     "Well, when they closed their League offices that was a sign that
     they cared no longer about Mr. Jabez Wilson's presence--in other
     words, that they had completed their tunnel. But it was essential
     that they should use it soon, as it might be discovered, or the
     bullion might be removed. Saturday would suit them better than any
     other day, as it would give them two days for their escape. For all
     these reasons I expected them to come to-night."

     "You reasoned it out beautifully," I exclaimed in unfeigned
     admiration. "It is so long a chain, and yet every link rings true."

     "It saved me from ennui," he answered, yawning. "Alas! I already feel
     it closing in upon me. My life is spent in one long effort to escape
     from the commonplaces of existence. These little problems help me to
     do so."

     "And you are a benefactor of the race," said I.

     He shrugged his shoulders. "Well, perhaps, after all, it is of some
     little use," he remarked. "'L'homme c'est rien--l'oeuvre c'est tout,'
     as Gustave Flaubert wrote to George Sand."






                               A CASE OF IDENTITY

     "My dear fellow," said Sherlock Holmes as we sat on either side of
     the fire in his lodgings at Baker Street, "life is infinitely
     stranger than anything which the mind of man could invent. We would
     not dare to conceive the things which are really mere commonplaces of
     existence. If we could fly out of that window hand in hand, hover
     over this great city, gently remove the roofs, and peep in at the
     queer things which are going on, the strange coincidences, the
     plannings, the cross-purposes, the wonderful chains of events,
     working through generations, and leading to the most outr?results,
     it would make all fiction with its conventionalities and foreseen
     conclusions most stale and unprofitable."

     "And yet I am not convinced of it," I answered. "The cases which come
     to light in the papers are, as a rule, bald enough, and vulgar
     enough. We have in our police reports realism pushed to its extreme
     limits, and yet the result is, it must be confessed, neither
     fascinating nor artistic."

     "A certain selection and discretion must be used in producing a
     realistic effect," remarked Holmes. "This is wanting in the police
     report, where more stress is laid, perhaps, upon the platitudes of
     the magistrate than upon the details, which to an observer contain
     the vital essence of the whole matter. Depend upon it, there is
     nothing so unnatural as the commonplace."

     I smiled and shook my head. "I can quite understand your thinking
     so." I said. "Of course, in your position of unofficial adviser and
     helper to everybody who is absolutely puzzled, throughout three
     continents, you are brought in contact with all that is strange and
     bizarre. But here"--I picked up the morning paper from the
     ground--"let us put it to a practical test. Here is the first heading
     upon which I come. 'A husband's cruelty to his wife.' There is half a
     column of print, but I know without reading it that it is all
     perfectly familiar to me. There is, of course, the other woman, the
     drink, the push, the blow, the bruise, the sympathetic sister or
     landlady. The crudest of writers could invent nothing more crude."

     "Indeed, your example is an unfortunate one for your argument," said
     Holmes, taking the paper and glancing his eye down it. "This is the
     Dundas separation case, and, as it happens, I was engaged in clearing
     up some small points in connection with it. The husband was a
     teetotaler, there was no other woman, and the conduct complained of
     was that he had drifted into the habit of winding up every meal by
     taking out his false teeth and hurling them at his wife, which, you
     will allow, is not an action likely to occur to the imagination of
     the average story-teller. Take a pinch of snuff, Doctor, and
     acknowledge that I have scored over you in your example."

     He held out his snuffbox of old gold, with a great amethyst in the
     centre of the lid. Its splendour was in such contrast to his homely
     ways and simple life that I could not help commenting upon it.

     "Ah," said he, "I forgot that I had not seen you for some weeks. It
     is a little souvenir from the King of Bohemia in return for my
     assistance in the case of the Irene Adler papers."

     "And the ring?" I asked, glancing at a remarkable brilliant which
     sparkled upon his finger.

     "It was from the reigning family of Holland, though the matter in
     which I served them was of such delicacy that I cannot confide it
     even to you, who have been good enough to chronicle one or two of my
     little problems."

     "And have you any on hand just now?" I asked with interest.

     "Some ten or twelve, but none which present any feature of interest.
     They are important, you understand, without being interesting.
     Indeed, I have found that it is usually in unimportant matters that
     there is a field for the observation, and for the quick analysis of
     cause and effect which gives the charm to an investigation. The
     larger crimes are apt to be the simpler, for the bigger the crime the
     more obvious, as a rule, is the motive. In these cases, save for one
     rather intricate matter which has been referred to me from
     Marseilles, there is nothing which presents any features of interest.
     It is possible, however, that I may have something better before very
     many minutes are over, for this is one of my clients, or I am much
     mistaken."

     He had risen from his chair and was standing between the parted
     blinds gazing down into the dull neutral-tinted London street.
     Looking over his shoulder, I saw that on the pavement opposite there
     stood a large woman with a heavy fur boa round her neck, and a large
     curling red feather in a broad-brimmed hat which was tilted in a
     coquettish Duchess of Devonshire fashion over her ear. From under
     this great panoply she peeped up in a nervous, hesitating fashion at
     our windows, while her body oscillated backward and forward, and her
     fingers fidgeted with her glove buttons. Suddenly, with a plunge, as
     of the swimmer who leaves the bank, she hurried across the road, and
     we heard the sharp clang of the bell.

     "I have seen those symptoms before," said Holmes, throwing his
     cigarette into the fire. "Oscillation upon the pavement always means
     an affaire de coeur. She would like advice, but is not sure that the
     matter is not too delicate for communication. And yet even here we
     may discriminate. When a woman has been seriously wronged by a man
     she no longer oscillates, and the usual symptom is a broken bell
     wire. Here we may take it that there is a love matter, but that the
     maiden is not so much angry as perplexed, or grieved. But here she
     comes in person to resolve our doubts."

     As he spoke there was a tap at the door, and the boy in buttons
     entered to announce Miss Mary Sutherland, while the lady herself
     loomed behind his small black figure like a full-sailed merchant-man
     behind a tiny pilot boat. Sherlock Holmes welcomed her with the easy
     courtesy for which he was remarkable, and, having closed the door and
     bowed her into an armchair, he looked her over in the minute and yet
     abstracted fashion which was peculiar to him.

     "Do you not find," he said, "that with your short sight it is a
     little trying to do so much typewriting?"

     "I did at first," she answered, "but now I know where the letters are
     without looking." Then, suddenly realising the full purport of his
     words, she gave a violent start and looked up, with fear and
     astonishment upon her broad, good-humoured face. "You've heard about
     me, Mr. Holmes," she cried, "else how could you know all that?"

     "Never mind," said Holmes, laughing; "it is my business to know
     things. Perhaps I have trained myself to see what others overlook. If
     not, why should you come to consult me?"

     "I came to you, sir, because I heard of you from Mrs. Etherege, whose
     husband you found so easy when the police and everyone had given him
     up for dead. Oh, Mr. Holmes, I wish you would do as much for me. I'm
     not rich, but still I have a hundred a year in my own right, besides
     the little that I make by the machine, and I would give it all to
     know what has become of Mr. Hosmer Angel."

     "Why did you come away to consult me in such a hurry?" asked Sherlock
     Holmes, with his finger-tips together and his eyes to the ceiling.

     Again a startled look came over the somewhat vacuous face of Miss
     Mary Sutherland. "Yes, I did bang out of the house," she said, "for
     it made me angry to see the easy way in which Mr. Windibank--that is,
     my father--took it all. He would not go to the police, and he would
     not go to you, and so at last, as he would do nothing and kept on
     saying that there was no harm done, it made me mad, and I just on
     with my things and came right away to you."

     "Your father," said Holmes, "your stepfather, surely, since the name
     is different."

     "Yes, my stepfather. I call him father, though it sounds funny, too,
     for he is only five years and two months older than myself."

     "And your mother is alive?"

     "Oh, yes, mother is alive and well. I wasn't best pleased, Mr.
     Holmes, when she married again so soon after father's death, and a
     man who was nearly fifteen years younger than herself. Father was a
     plumber in the Tottenham Court Road, and he left a tidy business
     behind him, which mother carried on with Mr. Hardy, the foreman; but
     when Mr. Windibank came he made her sell the business, for he was
     very superior, being a traveller in wines. They got ?700 for the
     goodwill and interest, which wasn't near as much as father could have
     got if he had been alive."

     I had expected to see Sherlock Holmes impatient under this rambling
     and inconsequential narrative, but, on the contrary, he had listened
     with the greatest concentration of attention.

     "Your own little income," he asked, "does it come out of the
     business?"

     "Oh, no, sir. It is quite separate and was left me by my uncle Ned in
     Auckland. It is in New Zealand stock, paying 4?per cent. Two
     thousand five hundred pounds was the amount, but I can only touch the
     interest."

     "You interest me extremely," said Holmes. "And since you draw so
     large a sum as a hundred a year, with what you earn into the bargain,
     you no doubt travel a little and indulge yourself in every way. I
     believe that a single lady can get on very nicely upon an income of
     about ?0."

     "I could do with much less than that, Mr. Holmes, but you understand
     that as long as I live at home I don't wish to be a burden to them,
     and so they have the use of the money just while I am staying with
     them. Of course, that is only just for the time. Mr. Windibank draws
     my interest every quarter and pays it over to mother, and I find that
     I can do pretty well with what I earn at typewriting. It brings me
     twopence a sheet, and I can often do from fifteen to twenty sheets in
     a day."

     "You have made your position very clear to me," said Holmes. "This is
     my friend, Dr. Watson, before whom you can speak as freely as before
     myself. Kindly tell us now all about your connection with Mr. Hosmer
     Angel."

     A flush stole over Miss Sutherland's face, and she picked nervously
     at the fringe of her jacket. "I met him first at the gasfitters'
     ball," she said. "They used to send father tickets when he was alive,
     and then afterwards they remembered us, and sent them to mother. Mr.
     Windibank did not wish us to go. He never did wish us to go anywhere.
     He would get quite mad if I wanted so much as to join a Sunday-school
     treat. But this time I was set on going, and I would go; for what
     right had he to prevent? He said the folk were not fit for us to
     know, when all father's friends were to be there. And he said that I
     had nothing fit to wear, when I had my purple plush that I had never
     so much as taken out of the drawer. At last, when nothing else would
     do, he went off to France upon the business of the firm, but we went,
     mother and I, with Mr. Hardy, who used to be our foreman, and it was
     there I met Mr. Hosmer Angel."

     "I suppose," said Holmes, "that when Mr. Windibank came back from
     France he was very annoyed at your having gone to the ball."

     "Oh, well, he was very good about it. He laughed, I remember, and
     shrugged his shoulders, and said there was no use denying anything to
     a woman, for she would have her way."

     "I see. Then at the gasfitters' ball you met, as I understand, a
     gentleman called Mr. Hosmer Angel."

     "Yes, sir. I met him that night, and he called next day to ask if we
     had got home all safe, and after that we met him--that is to say, Mr.
     Holmes, I met him twice for walks, but after that father came back
     again, and Mr. Hosmer Angel could not come to the house any more."

     "No?"

     "Well, you know father didn't like anything of the sort. He wouldn't
     have any visitors if he could help it, and he used to say that a
     woman should be happy in her own family circle. But then, as I used
     to say to mother, a woman wants her own circle to begin with, and I
     had not got mine yet."

     "But how about Mr. Hosmer Angel? Did he make no attempt to see you?"

     "Well, father was going off to France again in a week, and Hosmer
     wrote and said that it would be safer and better not to see each
     other until he had gone. We could write in the meantime, and he used
     to write every day. I took the letters in in the morning, so there
     was no need for father to know."

     "Were you engaged to the gentleman at this time?"

     "Oh, yes, Mr. Holmes. We were engaged after the first walk that we
     took. Hosmer--Mr. Angel--was a cashier in an office in Leadenhall
     Street--and--"

     "What office?"

     "That's the worst of it, Mr. Holmes, I don't know."

     "Where did he live, then?"

     "He slept on the premises."

     "And you don't know his address?"

     "No--except that it was Leadenhall Street."

     "Where did you address your letters, then?"

     "To the Leadenhall Street Post Office, to be left till called for. He
     said that if they were sent to the office he would be chaffed by all
     the other clerks about having letters from a lady, so I offered to
     typewrite them, like he did his, but he wouldn't have that, for he
     said that when I wrote them they seemed to come from me, but when
     they were typewritten he always felt that the machine had come
     between us. That will just show you how fond he was of me, Mr.
     Holmes, and the little things that he would think of."

     "It was most suggestive," said Holmes. "It has long been an axiom of
     mine that the little things are infinitely the most important.  Can
     you remember any other little things about Mr. Hosmer Angel?"

     "He was a very shy man, Mr. Holmes. He would rather walk with me in
     the evening than in the daylight, for he said that he hated to be
     conspicuous. Very retiring and gentlemanly he was. Even his voice was
     gentle. He'd had the quinsy and swollen glands when he was young, he
     told me, and it had left him with a weak throat, and a hesitating,
     whispering fashion of speech. He was always well dressed, very neat
     and plain, but his eyes were weak, just as mine are, and he wore
     tinted glasses against the glare."

     "Well, and what happened when Mr. Windibank, your stepfather,
     returned to France?"

     "Mr. Hosmer Angel came to the house again and proposed that we should
     marry before father came back. He was in dreadful earnest and made me
     swear, with my hands on the Testament, that whatever happened I would
     always be true to him. Mother said he was quite right to make me
     swear, and that it was a sign of his passion. Mother was all in his
     favour from the first and was even fonder of him than I was. Then,
     when they talked of marrying within the week, I began to ask about
     father; but they both said never to mind about father, but just to
     tell him afterwards, and mother said she would make it all right with
     him. I didn't quite like that, Mr. Holmes. It seemed funny that I
     should ask his leave, as he was only a few years older than me; but I
     didn't want to do anything on the sly, so I wrote to father at
     Bordeaux, where the company has its French offices, but the letter
     came back to me on the very morning of the wedding."

     "It missed him, then?"

     "Yes, sir; for he had started to England just before it arrived."

     "Ha! that was unfortunate. Your wedding was arranged, then, for the
     Friday. Was it to be in church?"

     "Yes, sir, but very quietly. It was to be at St. Saviour's, near
     King's Cross, and we were to have breakfast afterwards at the St.
     Pancras Hotel. Hosmer came for us in a hansom, but as there were two
     of us he put us both into it and stepped himself into a four-wheeler,
     which happened to be the only other cab in the street. We got to the
     church first, and when the four-wheeler drove up we waited for him to
     step out, but he never did, and when the cabman got down from the box
     and looked there was no one there! The cabman said that he could not
     imagine what had become of him, for he had seen him get in with his
     own eyes. That was last Friday, Mr. Holmes, and I have never seen or
     heard anything since then to throw any light upon what became of
     him."

     "It seems to me that you have been very shamefully treated," said
     Holmes.

     "Oh, no, sir! He was too good and kind to leave me so. Why, all the
     morning he was saying to me that, whatever happened, I was to be
     true; and that even if something quite unforeseen occurred to
     separate us, I was always to remember that I was pledged to him, and
     that he would claim his pledge sooner or later. It seemed strange
     talk for a wedding-morning, but what has happened since gives a
     meaning to it."

     "Most certainly it does. Your own opinion is, then, that some
     unforeseen catastrophe has occurred to him?"

     "Yes, sir. I believe that he foresaw some danger, or else he would
     not have talked so. And then I think that what he foresaw happened."

     "But you have no notion as to what it could have been?"

     "None."

     "One more question. How did your mother take the matter?"

     "She was angry, and said that I was never to speak of the matter
     again."

     "And your father? Did you tell him?"

     "Yes; and he seemed to think, with me, that something had happened,
     and that I should hear of Hosmer again. As he said, what interest
     could anyone have in bringing me to the doors of the church, and then
     leaving me? Now, if he had borrowed my money, or if he had married me
     and got my money settled on him, there might be some reason, but
     Hosmer was very independent about money and never would look at a
     shilling of mine. And yet, what could have happened? And why could he
     not write? Oh, it drives me half-mad to think of it, and I can't
     sleep a wink at night." She pulled a little handkerchief out of her
     muff and began to sob heavily into it.

     "I shall glance into the case for you," said Holmes, rising, "and I
     have no doubt that we shall reach some definite result. Let the
     weight of the matter rest upon me now, and do not let your mind dwell
     upon it further. Above all, try to let Mr. Hosmer Angel vanish from
     your memory, as he has done from your life."

     "Then you don't think I'll see him again?"

     "I fear not."

     "Then what has happened to him?"

     "You will leave that question in my hands. I should like an accurate
     description of him and any letters of his which you can spare."

     "I advertised for him in last Saturday's Chronicle," said she. "Here
     is the slip and here are four letters from him."

     "Thank you. And your address?"

     "No. 31 Lyon Place, Camberwell."

     "Mr. Angel's address you never had, I understand. Where is your
     father's place of business?"

     "He travels for Westhouse & Marbank, the great claret importers of
     Fenchurch Street."

     "Thank you. You have made your statement very clearly. You will leave
     the papers here, and remember the advice which I have given you. Let
     the whole incident be a sealed book, and do not allow it to affect
     your life."

     "You are very kind, Mr. Holmes, but I cannot do that. I shall be true
     to Hosmer. He shall find me ready when he comes back."

     For all the preposterous hat and the vacuous face, there was
     something noble in the simple faith of our visitor which compelled
     our respect. She laid her little bundle of papers upon the table and
     went her way, with a promise to come again whenever she might be
     summoned.

     Sherlock Holmes sat silent for a few minutes with his fingertips
     still pressed together, his legs stretched out in front of him, and
     his gaze directed upward to the ceiling. Then he took down from the
     rack the old and oily clay pipe, which was to him as a counsellor,
     and, having lit it, he leaned back in his chair, with the thick blue
     cloud-wreaths spinning up from him, and a look of infinite languor in
     his face.

     "Quite an interesting study, that maiden," he observed. "I found her
     more interesting than her little problem, which, by the way, is
     rather a trite one. You will find parallel cases, if you consult my
     index, in Andover in '77, and there was something of the sort at The
     Hague last year. Old as is the idea, however, there were one or two
     details which were new to me. But the maiden herself was most
     instructive."

     "You appeared to read a good deal upon her which was quite invisible
     to me," I remarked.

     "Not invisible but unnoticed, Watson. You did not know where to look,
     and so you missed all that was important. I can never bring you to
     realise the importance of sleeves, the suggestiveness of thumb-nails,
     or the great issues that may hang from a boot-lace. Now, what did you
     gather from that woman's appearance? Describe it."

     "Well, she had a slate-coloured, broad-brimmed straw hat, with a
     feather of a brickish red. Her jacket was black, with black beads
     sewn upon it, and a fringe of little black jet ornaments. Her dress
     was brown, rather darker than coffee colour, with a little purple
     plush at the neck and sleeves. Her gloves were greyish and were worn
     through at the right forefinger. Her boots I didn't observe. She had
     small round, hanging gold earrings, and a general air of being fairly
     well-to-do in a vulgar, comfortable, easy-going way."

     Sherlock Holmes clapped his hands softly together and chuckled.

     "'Pon my word, Watson, you are coming along wonderfully. You have
     really done very well indeed. It is true that you have missed
     everything of importance, but you have hit upon the method, and you
     have a quick eye for colour. Never trust to general impressions, my
     boy, but concentrate yourself upon details. My first glance is always
     at a woman's sleeve. In a man it is perhaps better first to take the
     knee of the trouser. As you observe, this woman had plush upon her
     sleeves, which is a most useful material for showing traces. The
     double line a little above the wrist, where the typewritist presses
     against the table, was beautifully defined. The sewing-machine, of
     the hand type, leaves a similar mark, but only on the left arm, and
     on the side of it farthest from the thumb, instead of being right
     across the broadest part, as this was. I then glanced at her face,
     and, observing the dint of a pince-nez at either side of her nose, I
     ventured a remark upon short sight and typewriting, which seemed to
     surprise her."

     "It surprised me."

     "But, surely, it was obvious. I was then much surprised and
     interested on glancing down to observe that, though the boots which
     she was wearing were not unlike each other, they were really odd
     ones; the one having a slightly decorated toe-cap, and the other a
     plain one. One was buttoned only in the two lower buttons out of
     five, and the other at the first, third, and fifth. Now, when you see
     that a young lady, otherwise neatly dressed, has come away from home
     with odd boots, half-buttoned, it is no great deduction to say that
     she came away in a hurry."

     "And what else?" I asked, keenly interested, as I always was, by my
     friend's incisive reasoning.

     "I noted, in passing, that she had written a note before leaving home
     but after being fully dressed. You observed that her right glove was
     torn at the forefinger, but you did not apparently see that both
     glove and finger were stained with violet ink. She had written in a
     hurry and dipped her pen too deep. It must have been this morning, or
     the mark would not remain clear upon the finger. All this is amusing,
     though rather elementary, but I must go back to business, Watson.
     Would you mind reading me the advertised description of Mr. Hosmer
     Angel?"

     I held the little printed slip to the light.

     "Missing," it said, "on the morning of the fourteenth, a gentleman
     named Hosmer Angel. About five ft. seven in. in height; strongly
     built, sallow complexion, black hair, a little bald in the centre,
     bushy, black side-whiskers and moustache; tinted glasses, slight
     infirmity of speech. Was dressed, when last seen, in black frock-coat
     faced with silk, black waistcoat, gold Albert chain, and grey Harris
     tweed trousers, with brown gaiters over elastic-sided boots. Known to
     have been employed in an office in Leadenhall Street. Anybody
     bringing--"

     "That will do," said Holmes. "As to the letters," he continued,
     glancing over them, "they are very commonplace. Absolutely no clue in
     them to Mr. Angel, save that he quotes Balzac once. There is one
     remarkable point, however, which will no doubt strike you."

     "They are typewritten," I remarked.

     "Not only that, but the signature is typewritten. Look at the neat
     little 'Hosmer Angel' at the bottom. There is a date, you see, but no
     superscription except Leadenhall Street, which is rather vague. The
     point about the signature is very suggestive--in fact, we may call it
     conclusive."

     "Of what?"

     "My dear fellow, is it possible you do not see how strongly it bears
     upon the case?"

     "I cannot say that I do unless it were that he wished to be able to
     deny his signature if an action for breach of promise were
     instituted."

     "No, that was not the point. However, I shall write two letters,
     which should settle the matter. One is to a firm in the City, the
     other is to the young lady's stepfather, Mr. Windibank, asking him
     whether he could meet us here at six o'clock tomorrow evening. It is
     just as well that we should do business with the male relatives. And
     now, Doctor, we can do nothing until the answers to those letters
     come, so we may put our little problem upon the shelf for the
     interim."

     I had had so many reasons to believe in my friend's subtle powers of
     reasoning and extraordinary energy in action that I felt that he must
     have some solid grounds for the assured and easy demeanour with which
     he treated the singular mystery which he had been called upon to
     fathom. Once only had I known him to fail, in the case of the King of
     Bohemia and of the Irene Adler photograph; but when I looked back to
     the weird business of the Sign of Four, and the extraordinary
     circumstances connected with the Study in Scarlet, I felt that it
     would be a strange tangle indeed which he could not unravel.

     I left him then, still puffing at his black clay pipe, with the
     conviction that when I came again on the next evening I would find
     that he held in his hands all the clues which would lead up to the
     identity of the disappearing bridegroom of Miss Mary Sutherland.

     A professional case of great gravity was engaging my own attention at
     the time, and the whole of next day I was busy at the bedside of the
     sufferer. It was not until close upon six o'clock that I found myself
     free and was able to spring into a hansom and drive to Baker Street,
     half afraid that I might be too late to assist at the dnouement of
     the little mystery. I found Sherlock Holmes alone, however, half
     asleep, with his long, thin form curled up in the recesses of his
     armchair. A formidable array of bottles and test-tubes, with the
     pungent cleanly smell of hydrochloric acid, told me that he had spent
     his day in the chemical work which was so dear to him.

     "Well, have you solved it?" I asked as I entered.

     "Yes. It was the bisulphate of baryta."

     "No, no, the mystery!" I cried.

     "Oh, that! I thought of the salt that I have been working upon. There
     was never any mystery in the matter, though, as I said yesterday,
     some of the details are of interest. The only drawback is that there
     is no law, I fear, that can touch the scoundrel."

     "Who was he, then, and what was his object in deserting Miss
     Sutherland?"

     The question was hardly out of my mouth, and Holmes had not yet
     opened his lips to reply, when we heard a heavy footfall in the
     passage and a tap at the door.

     "This is the girl's stepfather, Mr. James Windibank," said Holmes.
     "He has written to me to say that he would be here at six. Come in!"

     The man who entered was a sturdy, middle-sized fellow, some thirty
     years of age, clean-shaven, and sallow-skinned, with a bland,
     insinuating manner, and a pair of wonderfully sharp and penetrating
     grey eyes. He shot a questioning glance at each of us, placed his
     shiny top-hat upon the sideboard, and with a slight bow sidled down
     into the nearest chair.

     "Good-evening, Mr. James Windibank," said Holmes. "I think that this
     typewritten letter is from you, in which you made an appointment with
     me for six o'clock?"

     "Yes, sir. I am afraid that I am a little late, but I am not quite my
     own master, you know. I am sorry that Miss Sutherland has troubled
     you about this little matter, for I think it is far better not to
     wash linen of the sort in public. It was quite against my wishes that
     she came, but she is a very excitable, impulsive girl, as you may
     have noticed, and she is not easily controlled when she has made up
     her mind on a point. Of course, I did not mind you so much, as you
     are not connected with the official police, but it is not pleasant to
     have a family misfortune like this noised abroad. Besides, it is a
     useless expense, for how could you possibly find this Hosmer Angel?"

     "On the contrary," said Holmes quietly; "I have every reason to
     believe that I will succeed in discovering Mr. Hosmer Angel."

     Mr. Windibank gave a violent start and dropped his gloves. "I am
     delighted to hear it," he said.

     "It is a curious thing," remarked Holmes, "that a typewriter has
     really quite as much individuality as a man's handwriting. Unless
     they are quite new, no two of them write exactly alike. Some letters
     get more worn than others, and some wear only on one side. Now, you
     remark in this note of yours, Mr. Windibank, that in every case there
     is some little slurring over of the 'e,' and a slight defect in the
     tail of the 'r.' There are fourteen other characteristics, but those
     are the more obvious."

     "We do all our correspondence with this machine at the office, and no
     doubt it is a little worn," our visitor answered, glancing keenly at
     Holmes with his bright little eyes.

     "And now I will show you what is really a very interesting study, Mr.
     Windibank," Holmes continued. "I think of writing another little
     monograph some of these days on the typewriter and its relation to
     crime. It is a subject to which I have devoted some little attention.
     I have here four letters which purport to come from the missing man.
     They are all typewritten. In each case, not only are the 'e's'
     slurred and the 'r's' tailless, but you will observe, if you care to
     use my magnifying lens, that the fourteen other characteristics to
     which I have alluded are there as well."

     Mr. Windibank sprang out of his chair and picked up his hat. "I
     cannot waste time over this sort of fantastic talk, Mr. Holmes," he
     said. "If you can catch the man, catch him, and let me know when you
     have done it."

     "Certainly," said Holmes, stepping over and turning the key in the
     door. "I let you know, then, that I have caught him!"

     "What! where?" shouted Mr. Windibank, turning white to his lips and
     glancing about him like a rat in a trap.

     "Oh, it won't do--really it won't," said Holmes suavely. "There is no
     possible getting out of it, Mr. Windibank. It is quite too
     transparent, and it was a very bad compliment when you said that it
     was impossible for me to solve so simple a question. That's right!
     Sit down and let us talk it over."

     Our visitor collapsed into a chair, with a ghastly face and a glitter
     of moisture on his brow. "It--it's not actionable," he stammered.

     "I am very much afraid that it is not. But between ourselves,
     Windibank, it was as cruel and selfish and heartless a trick in a
     petty way as ever came before me. Now, let me just run over the
     course of events, and you will contradict me if I go wrong."

     The man sat huddled up in his chair, with his head sunk upon his
     breast, like one who is utterly crushed. Holmes stuck his feet up on
     the corner of the mantelpiece and, leaning back with his hands in his
     pockets, began talking, rather to himself, as it seemed, than to us.

     "The man married a woman very much older than himself for her money,"
     said he, "and he enjoyed the use of the money of the daughter as long
     as she lived with them. It was a considerable sum, for people in
     their position, and the loss of it would have made a serious
     difference. It was worth an effort to preserve it. The daughter was
     of a good, amiable disposition, but affectionate and warm-hearted in
     her ways, so that it was evident that with her fair personal
     advantages, and her little income, she would not be allowed to remain
     single long. Now her marriage would mean, of course, the loss of a
     hundred a year, so what does her stepfather do to prevent it? He
     takes the obvious course of keeping her at home and forbidding her to
     seek the company of people of her own age. But soon he found that
     that would not answer forever. She became restive, insisted upon her
     rights, and finally announced her positive intention of going to a
     certain ball. What does her clever stepfather do then? He conceives
     an idea more creditable to his head than to his heart. With the
     connivance and assistance of his wife he disguised himself, covered
     those keen eyes with tinted glasses, masked the face with a moustache
     and a pair of bushy whiskers, sunk that clear voice into an
     insinuating whisper, and doubly secure on account of the girl's short
     sight, he appears as Mr. Hosmer Angel, and keeps off other lovers by
     making love himself."

     "It was only a joke at first," groaned our visitor. "We never thought
     that she would have been so carried away."

     "Very likely not. However that may be, the young lady was very
     decidedly carried away, and, having quite made up her mind that her
     stepfather was in France, the suspicion of treachery never for an
     instant entered her mind. She was flattered by the gentleman's
     attentions, and the effect was increased by the loudly expressed
     admiration of her mother. Then Mr. Angel began to call, for it was
     obvious that the matter should be pushed as far as it would go if a
     real effect were to be produced. There were meetings, and an
     engagement, which would finally secure the girl's affections from
     turning towards anyone else. But the deception could not be kept up
     forever. These pretended journeys to France were rather cumbrous. The
     thing to do was clearly to bring the business to an end in such a
     dramatic manner that it would leave a permanent impression upon the
     young lady's mind and prevent her from looking upon any other suitor
     for some time to come. Hence those vows of fidelity exacted upon a
     Testament, and hence also the allusions to a possibility of something
     happening on the very morning of the wedding. James Windibank wished
     Miss Sutherland to be so bound to Hosmer Angel, and so uncertain as
     to his fate, that for ten years to come, at any rate, she would not
     listen to another man. As far as the church door he brought her, and
     then, as he could go no farther, he conveniently vanished away by the
     old trick of stepping in at one door of a four-wheeler and out at the
     other. I think that was the chain of events, Mr. Windibank!"

     Our visitor had recovered something of his assurance while Holmes had
     been talking, and he rose from his chair now with a cold sneer upon
     his pale face.

     "It may be so, or it may not, Mr. Holmes," said he, "but if you are
     so very sharp you ought to be sharp enough to know that it is you who
     are breaking the law now, and not me. I have done nothing actionable
     from the first, but as long as you keep that door locked you lay
     yourself open to an action for assault and illegal constraint."

     "The law cannot, as you say, touch you," said Holmes, unlocking and
     throwing open the door, "yet there never was a man who deserved
     punishment more. If the young lady has a brother or a friend, he
     ought to lay a whip across your shoulders. By Jove!" he continued,
     flushing up at the sight of the bitter sneer upon the man's face, "it
     is not part of my duties to my client, but here's a hunting crop
     handy, and I think I shall just treat myself to--" He took two swift
     steps to the whip, but before he could grasp it there was a wild
     clatter of steps upon the stairs, the heavy hall door banged, and
     from the window we could see Mr. James Windibank running at the top
     of his speed down the road.

     "There's a cold-blooded scoundrel!" said Holmes, laughing, as he
     threw himself down into his chair once more. "That fellow will rise
     from crime to crime until he does something very bad, and ends on a
     gallows. The case has, in some respects, been not entirely devoid of
     interest."

     "I cannot now entirely see all the steps of your reasoning," I
     remarked.

     "Well, of course it was obvious from the first that this Mr. Hosmer
     Angel must have some strong object for his curious conduct, and it
     was equally clear that the only man who really profited by the
     incident, as far as we could see, was the stepfather. Then the fact
     that the two men were never together, but that the one always
     appeared when the other was away, was suggestive. So were the tinted
     spectacles and the curious voice, which both hinted at a disguise, as
     did the bushy whiskers. My suspicions were all confirmed by his
     peculiar action in typewriting his signature, which, of course,
     inferred that his handwriting was so familiar to her that she would
     recognise even the smallest sample of it. You see all these isolated
     facts, together with many minor ones, all pointed in the same
     direction."

     "And how did you verify them?"

     "Having once spotted my man, it was easy to get corroboration. I knew
     the firm for which this man worked. Having taken the printed
     description. I eliminated everything from it which could be the
     result of a disguise--the whiskers, the glasses, the voice, and I
     sent it to the firm, with a request that they would inform me whether
     it answered to the description of any of their travellers. I had
     already noticed the peculiarities of the typewriter, and I wrote to
     the man himself at his business address asking him if he would come
     here. As I expected, his reply was typewritten and revealed the same
     trivial but characteristic defects. The same post brought me a letter
     from Westhouse & Marbank, of Fenchurch Street, to say that the
     description tallied in every respect with that of their employee,
     James Windibank. Voil?tout!"

     "And Miss Sutherland?"

     "If I tell her she will not believe me. You may remember the old
     Persian saying, 'There is danger for him who taketh the tiger cub,
     and danger also for whoso snatches a delusion from a woman.' There is
     as much sense in Hafiz as in Horace, and as much knowledge of the
     world."






                           THE BOSCOMBE VALLEY MYSTERY

     We were seated at breakfast one morning, my wife and I, when the maid
     brought in a telegram. It was from Sherlock Holmes and ran in this
     way:

     "Have you a couple of days to spare? Have just been wired for from
     the west of England in connection with Boscombe Valley tragedy. Shall
     be glad if you will come with me. Air and scenery perfect. Leave
     Paddington by the 11.15."
     "What do you say, dear?" said my wife, looking across at me. "Will
     you go?" 

     "I really don't know what to say. I have a fairly long list at
     present."

     "Oh, Anstruther would do your work for you. You have been looking a
     little pale lately. I think that the change would do you good, and
     you are always so interested in Mr. Sherlock Holmes' cases."

     "I should be ungrateful if I were not, seeing what I gained through
     one of them," I answered. "But if I am to go, I must pack at once,
     for I have only half an hour."

     My experience of camp life in Afghanistan had at least had the effect
     of making me a prompt and ready traveller. My wants were few and
     simple, so that in less than the time stated I was in a cab with my
     valise, rattling away to Paddington Station. Sherlock Holmes was
     pacing up and down the platform, his tall, gaunt figure made even
     gaunter and taller by his long grey travelling-cloak and
     close-fitting cloth cap.

     "It is really very good of you to come, Watson," said he. "It makes a
     considerable difference to me, having someone with me on whom I can
     thoroughly rely. Local aid is always either worthless or else
     biassed. If you will keep the two corner seats I shall get the
     tickets."

     We had the carriage to ourselves save for an immense litter of papers
     which Holmes had brought with him. Among these he rummaged and read,
     with intervals of note-taking and of meditation, until we were past
     Reading. Then he suddenly rolled them all into a gigantic ball and
     tossed them up onto the rack.

     "Have you heard anything of the case?" he asked.

     "Not a word. I have not seen a paper for some days."

     "The London press has not had very full accounts. I have just been
     looking through all the recent papers in order to master the
     particulars. It seems, from what I gather, to be one of those simple
     cases which are so extremely difficult."

     "That sounds a little paradoxical."

     "But it is profoundly true. Singularity is almost invariably a clue.
     The more featureless and commonplace a crime is, the more difficult
     it is to bring it home. In this case, however, they have established
     a very serious case against the son of the murdered man."

     "It is a murder, then?"

     "Well, it is conjectured to be so. I shall take nothing for granted
     until I have the opportunity of looking personally into it. I will
     explain the state of things to you, as far as I have been able to
     understand it, in a very few words.

     "Boscombe Valley is a country district not very far from Ross, in
     Herefordshire. The largest landed proprietor in that part is a Mr.
     John Turner, who made his money in Australia and returned some years
     ago to the old country. One of the farms which he held, that of
     Hatherley, was let to Mr. Charles McCarthy, who was also an
     ex-Australian. The men had known each other in the colonies, so that
     it was not unnatural that when they came to settle down they should
     do so as near each other as possible. Turner was apparently the
     richer man, so McCarthy became his tenant but still remained, it
     seems, upon terms of perfect equality, as they were frequently
     together. McCarthy had one son, a lad of eighteen, and Turner had an
     only daughter of the same age, but neither of them had wives living.
     They appear to have avoided the society of the neighbouring English
     families and to have led retired lives, though both the McCarthys
     were fond of sport and were frequently seen at the race-meetings of
     the neighbourhood. McCarthy kept two servants--a man and a girl.
     Turner had a considerable household, some half-dozen at the least.
     That is as much as I have been able to gather about the families. Now
     for the facts.

     "On June 3rd, that is, on Monday last, McCarthy left his house at
     Hatherley about three in the afternoon and walked down to the
     Boscombe Pool, which is a small lake formed by the spreading out of
     the stream which runs down the Boscombe Valley. He had been out with
     his serving-man in the morning at Ross, and he had told the man that
     he must hurry, as he had an appointment of importance to keep at
     three. From that appointment he never came back alive.

     "From Hatherley Farm-house to the Boscombe Pool is a quarter of a
     mile, and two people saw him as he passed over this ground. One was
     an old woman, whose name is not mentioned, and the other was William
     Crowder, a game-keeper in the employ of Mr. Turner. Both these
     witnesses depose that Mr. McCarthy was walking alone. The game-keeper
     adds that within a few minutes of his seeing Mr. McCarthy pass he had
     seen his son, Mr. James McCarthy, going the same way with a gun under
     his arm. To the best of his belief, the father was actually in sight
     at the time, and the son was following him. He thought no more of the
     matter until he heard in the evening of the tragedy that had
     occurred.

     "The two McCarthys were seen after the time when William Crowder, the
     game-keeper, lost sight of them. The Boscombe Pool is thickly wooded
     round, with just a fringe of grass and of reeds round the edge. A
     girl of fourteen, Patience Moran, who is the daughter of the
     lodge-keeper of the Boscombe Valley estate, was in one of the woods
     picking flowers. She states that while she was there she saw, at the
     border of the wood and close by the lake, Mr. McCarthy and his son,
     and that they appeared to be having a violent quarrel. She heard Mr.
     McCarthy the elder using very strong language to his son, and she saw
     the latter raise up his hand as if to strike his father. She was so
     frightened by their violence that she ran away and told her mother
     when she reached home that she had left the two McCarthys quarrelling
     near Boscombe Pool, and that she was afraid that they were going to
     fight. She had hardly said the words when young Mr. McCarthy came
     running up to the lodge to say that he had found his father dead in
     the wood, and to ask for the help of the lodge-keeper. He was much
     excited, without either his gun or his hat, and his right hand and
     sleeve were observed to be stained with fresh blood. On following him
     they found the dead body stretched out upon the grass beside the
     pool. The head had been beaten in by repeated blows of some heavy and
     blunt weapon. The injuries were such as might very well have been
     inflicted by the butt-end of his son's gun, which was found lying on
     the grass within a few paces of the body. Under these circumstances
     the young man was instantly arrested, and a verdict of 'wilful
     murder' having been returned at the inquest on Tuesday, he was on
     Wednesday brought before the magistrates at Ross, who have referred
     the case to the next Assizes. Those are the main facts of the case as
     they came out before the coroner and the police-court."

     "I could hardly imagine a more damning case," I remarked. "If ever
     circumstantial evidence pointed to a criminal it does so here."

     "Circumstantial evidence is a very tricky thing," answered Holmes
     thoughtfully. "It may seem to point very straight to one thing, but
     if you shift your own point of view a little, you may find it
     pointing in an equally uncompromising manner to something entirely
     different. It must be confessed, however, that the case looks
     exceedingly grave against the young man, and it is very possible that
     he is indeed the culprit. There are several people in the
     neighbourhood, however, and among them Miss Turner, the daughter of
     the neighbouring landowner, who believe in his innocence, and who
     have retained Lestrade, whom you may recollect in connection with the
     Study in Scarlet, to work out the case in his interest. Lestrade,
     being rather puzzled, has referred the case to me, and hence it is
     that two middle-aged gentlemen are flying westward at fifty miles an
     hour instead of quietly digesting their breakfasts at home."

     "I am afraid," said I, "that the facts are so obvious that you will
     find little credit to be gained out of this case."

     "There is nothing more deceptive than an obvious fact," he answered,
     laughing. "Besides, we may chance to hit upon some other obvious
     facts which may have been by no means obvious to Mr. Lestrade. You
     know me too well to think that I am boasting when I say that I shall
     either confirm or destroy his theory by means which he is quite
     incapable of employing, or even of understanding. To take the first
     example to hand, I very clearly perceive that in your bedroom the
     window is upon the right-hand side, and yet I question whether Mr.
     Lestrade would have noted even so self-evident a thing as that."

     "How on earth--"

     "My dear fellow, I know you well. I know the military neatness which
     characterises you. You shave every morning, and in this season you
     shave by the sunlight; but since your shaving is less and less
     complete as we get farther back on the left side, until it becomes
     positively slovenly as we get round the angle of the jaw, it is
     surely very clear that that side is less illuminated than the other.
     I could not imagine a man of your habits looking at himself in an
     equal light and being satisfied with such a result. I only quote this
     as a trivial example of observation and inference. Therein lies my
     mtier, and it is just possible that it may be of some service in the
     investigation which lies before us. There are one or two minor points
     which were brought out in the inquest, and which are worth
     considering."

     "What are they?"

     "It appears that his arrest did not take place at once, but after the
     return to Hatherley Farm. On the inspector of constabulary informing
     him that he was a prisoner, he remarked that he was not surprised to
     hear it, and that it was no more than his deserts. This observation
     of his had the natural effect of removing any traces of doubt which
     might have remained in the minds of the coroner's jury."

     "It was a confession," I ejaculated.

     "No, for it was followed by a protestation of innocence."

     "Coming on the top of such a damning series of events, it was at
     least a most suspicious remark."

     "On the contrary," said Holmes, "it is the brightest rift which I can
     at present see in the clouds. However innocent he might be, he could
     not be such an absolute imbecile as not to see that the circumstances
     were very black against him. Had he appeared surprised at his own
     arrest, or feigned indignation at it, I should have looked upon it as
     highly suspicious, because such surprise or anger would not be
     natural under the circumstances, and yet might appear to be the best
     policy to a scheming man. His frank acceptance of the situation marks
     him as either an innocent man, or else as a man of considerable
     self-restraint and firmness. As to his remark about his deserts, it
     was also not unnatural if you consider that he stood beside the dead
     body of his father, and that there is no doubt that he had that very
     day so far forgotten his filial duty as to bandy words with him, and
     even, according to the little girl whose evidence is so important, to
     raise his hand as if to strike him. The self-reproach and contrition
     which are displayed in his remark appear to me to be the signs of a
     healthy mind rather than of a guilty one."

     I shook my head. "Many men have been hanged on far slighter
     evidence," I remarked.

     "So they have. And many men have been wrongfully hanged."

     "What is the young man's own account of the matter?"

     "It is, I am afraid, not very encouraging to his supporters, though
     there are one or two points in it which are suggestive. You will find
     it here, and may read it for yourself."

     He picked out from his bundle a copy of the local Herefordshire
     paper, and having turned down the sheet he pointed out the paragraph
     in which the unfortunate young man had given his own statement of
     what had occurred. I settled myself down in the corner of the
     carriage and read it very carefully. It ran in this way:

     "Mr. James McCarthy, the only son of the deceased, was then called
     and gave evidence as follows: 'I had been away from home for three
     days at Bristol, and had only just returned upon the morning of last
     Monday, the 3rd. My father was absent from home at the time of my
     arrival, and I was informed by the maid that he had driven over to
     Ross with John Cobb, the groom. Shortly after my return I heard the
     wheels of his trap in the yard, and, looking out of my window, I saw
     him get out and walk rapidly out of the yard, though I was not aware
     in which direction he was going. I then took my gun and strolled out
     in the direction of the Boscombe Pool, with the intention of visiting
     the rabbit warren which is upon the other side. On my way I saw
     William Crowder, the game-keeper, as he had stated in his evidence;
     but he is mistaken in thinking that I was following my father. I had
     no idea that he was in front of me. When about a hundred yards from
     the pool I heard a cry of "Cooee!" which was a usual signal between
     my father and myself. I then hurried forward, and found him standing
     by the pool. He appeared to be much surprised at seeing me and asked
     me rather roughly what I was doing there. A conversation ensued which
     led to high words and almost to blows, for my father was a man of a
     very violent temper. Seeing that his passion was becoming
     ungovernable, I left him and returned towards Hatherley Farm. I had
     not gone more than 150 yards, however, when I heard a hideous outcry
     behind me, which caused me to run back again. I found my father
     expiring upon the ground, with his head terribly injured. I dropped
     my gun and held him in my arms, but he almost instantly expired. I
     knelt beside him for some minutes, and then made my way to Mr.
     Turner's lodge-keeper, his house being the nearest, to ask for
     assistance. I saw no one near my father when I returned, and I have
     no idea how he came by his injuries. He was not a popular man, being
     somewhat cold and forbidding in his manners, but he had, as far as I
     know, no active enemies. I know nothing further of the matter.'
     "The Coroner: Did your father make any statement to you before he
     died?
     "Witness: He mumbled a few words, but I could only catch some
     allusion to a rat.
     "The Coroner: What did you understand by that?
     "Witness: It conveyed no meaning to me. I thought that he was
     delirious.
     "The Coroner: What was the point upon which you and your father had
     this final quarrel?
     "Witness: I should prefer not to answer.
     "The Coroner: I am afraid that I must press it.
     "Witness: It is really impossible for me to tell you. I can assure
     you that it has nothing to do with the sad tragedy which followed.
     "The Coroner: That is for the court to decide. I need not point out
     to you that your refusal to answer will prejudice your case
     considerably in any future proceedings which may arise.
     "Witness: I must still refuse.
     "The Coroner: I understand that the cry of 'Cooee' was a common
     signal between you and your father?
     "Witness: It was.
     "The Coroner: How was it, then, that he uttered it before he saw you,
     and before he even knew that you had returned from Bristol?
     "Witness (with considerable confusion): I do not know.
     "A Juryman: Did you see nothing which aroused your suspicions when
     you returned on hearing the cry and found your father fatally
     injured?
     "Witness: Nothing definite.
     "The Coroner: What do you mean?
     "Witness: I was so disturbed and excited as I rushed out into the
     open, that I could think of nothing except of my father. Yet I have a
     vague impression that as I ran forward something lay upon the ground
     to the left of me. It seemed to me to be something grey in colour, a
     coat of some sort, or a plaid perhaps. When I rose from my father I
     looked round for it, but it was gone.
     "'Do you mean that it disappeared before you went for help?'
     "'Yes, it was gone.'
     "'You cannot say what it was?'
     "'No, I had a feeling something was there.'
     "'How far from the body?'
     "'A dozen yards or so.'
     "'And how far from the edge of the wood?'
     "'About the same.'
     "'Then if it was removed it was while you were within a dozen yards
     of it?'
     "'Yes, but with my back towards it.'
     "This concluded the examination of the witness."

     "I see," said I as I glanced down the column, "that the coroner in
     his concluding remarks was rather severe upon young McCarthy. He
     calls attention, and with reason, to the discrepancy about his father
     having signalled to him before seeing him, also to his refusal to
     give details of his conversation with his father, and his singular
     account of his father's dying words. They are all, as he remarks,
     very much against the son."

     Holmes laughed softly to himself and stretched himself out upon the
     cushioned seat. "Both you and the coroner have been at some pains,"
     said he, "to single out the very strongest points in the young man's
     favour. Don't you see that you alternately give him credit for having
     too much imagination and too little? Too little, if he could not
     invent a cause of quarrel which would give him the sympathy of the
     jury; too much, if he evolved from his own inner consciousness
     anything so outr?as a dying reference to a rat, and the incident of
     the vanishing cloth. No, sir, I shall approach this case from the
     point of view that what this young man says is true, and we shall see
     whither that hypothesis will lead us. And now here is my pocket
     Petrarch, and not another word shall I say of this case until we are
     on the scene of action. We lunch at Swindon, and I see that we shall
     be there in twenty minutes."

     It was nearly four o'clock when we at last, after passing through the
     beautiful Stroud Valley, and over the broad gleaming Severn, found
     ourselves at the pretty little country-town of Ross. A lean,
     ferret-like man, furtive and sly-looking, was waiting for us upon the
     platform. In spite of the light brown dustcoat and leather-leggings
     which he wore in deference to his rustic surroundings, I had no
     difficulty in recognising Lestrade, of Scotland Yard. With him we
     drove to the Hereford Arms where a room had already been engaged for
     us.

     "I have ordered a carriage," said Lestrade as we sat over a cup of
     tea. "I knew your energetic nature, and that you would not be happy
     until you had been on the scene of the crime."

     "It was very nice and complimentary of you," Holmes answered. "It is
     entirely a question of barometric pressure."

     Lestrade looked startled. "I do not quite follow," he said.

     "How is the glass? Twenty-nine, I see. No wind, and not a cloud in
     the sky. I have a caseful of cigarettes here which need smoking, and
     the sofa is very much superior to the usual country hotel
     abomination. I do not think that it is probable that I shall use the
     carriage to-night."

     Lestrade laughed indulgently. "You have, no doubt, already formed
     your conclusions from the newspapers," he said. "The case is as plain
     as a pikestaff, and the more one goes into it the plainer it becomes.
     Still, of course, one can't refuse a lady, and such a very positive
     one, too. She has heard of you, and would have your opinion, though I
     repeatedly told her that there was nothing which you could do which I
     had not already done. Why, bless my soul! here is her carriage at the
     door."

     He had hardly spoken before there rushed into the room one of the
     most lovely young women that I have ever seen in my life. Her violet
     eyes shining, her lips parted, a pink flush upon her cheeks, all
     thought of her natural reserve lost in her overpowering excitement
     and concern.

     "Oh, Mr. Sherlock Holmes!" she cried, glancing from one to the other
     of us, and finally, with a woman's quick intuition, fastening upon my
     companion, "I am so glad that you have come. I have driven down to
     tell you so. I know that James didn't do it. I know it, and I want
     you to start upon your work knowing it, too. Never let yourself doubt
     upon that point. We have known each other since we were little
     children, and I know his faults as no one else does; but he is too
     tender-hearted to hurt a fly. Such a charge is absurd to anyone who
     really knows him."

     "I hope we may clear him, Miss Turner," said Sherlock Holmes.  "You
     may rely upon my doing all that I can."

     "But you have read the evidence. You have formed some conclusion? Do
     you not see some loophole, some flaw? Do you not yourself think that
     he is innocent?"

     "I think that it is very probable."

     "There, now!" she cried, throwing back her head and looking defiantly
     at Lestrade. "You hear! He gives me hopes."

     Lestrade shrugged his shoulders. "I am afraid that my colleague has
     been a little quick in forming his conclusions," he said.

     "But he is right. Oh! I know that he is right. James never did it.
     And about his quarrel with his father, I am sure that the reason why
     he would not speak about it to the coroner was because I was
     concerned in it."

     "In what way?" asked Holmes.

     "It is no time for me to hide anything. James and his father had many
     disagreements about me. Mr. McCarthy was very anxious that there
     should be a marriage between us. James and I have always loved each
     other as brother and sister; but of course he is young and has seen
     very little of life yet, and--and--well, he naturally did not wish to
     do anything like that yet. So there were quarrels, and this, I am
     sure, was one of them."

     "And your father?" asked Holmes. "Was he in favour of such a union?"

     "No, he was averse to it also. No one but Mr. McCarthy was in favour
     of it." A quick blush passed over her fresh young face as Holmes shot
     one of his keen, questioning glances at her.

     "Thank you for this information," said he. "May I see your father if
     I call to-morrow?"

     "I am afraid the doctor won't allow it."

     "The doctor?"

     "Yes, have you not heard? Poor father has never been strong for years
     back, but this has broken him down completely. He has taken to his
     bed, and Dr. Willows says that he is a wreck and that his nervous
     system is shattered. Mr. McCarthy was the only man alive who had
     known dad in the old days in Victoria."

     "Ha! In Victoria! That is important."

     "Yes, at the mines."

     "Quite so; at the gold-mines, where, as I understand, Mr. Turner made
     his money."

     "Yes, certainly."

     "Thank you, Miss Turner. You have been of material assistance to me."

     "You will tell me if you have any news to-morrow. No doubt you will
     go to the prison to see James. Oh, if you do, Mr. Holmes, do tell him
     that I know him to be innocent."

     "I will, Miss Turner."

     "I must go home now, for dad is very ill, and he misses me so if I
     leave him. Good-bye, and God help you in your undertaking." She
     hurried from the room as impulsively as she had entered, and we heard
     the wheels of her carriage rattle off down the street.

     "I am ashamed of you, Holmes," said Lestrade with dignity after a few
     minutes' silence. "Why should you raise up hopes which you are bound
     to disappoint? I am not over-tender of heart, but I call it cruel."

     "I think that I see my way to clearing James McCarthy," said Holmes.
     "Have you an order to see him in prison?"

     "Yes, but only for you and me."

     "Then I shall reconsider my resolution about going out. We have still
     time to take a train to Hereford and see him to-night?"

     "Ample."

     "Then let us do so. Watson, I fear that you will find it very slow,
     but I shall only be away a couple of hours."

     I walked down to the station with them, and then wandered through the
     streets of the little town, finally returning to the hotel, where I
     lay upon the sofa and tried to interest myself in a yellow-backed
     novel. The puny plot of the story was so thin, however, when compared
     to the deep mystery through which we were groping, and I found my
     attention wander so continually from the action to the fact, that I
     at last flung it across the room and gave myself up entirely to a
     consideration of the events of the day. Supposing that this unhappy
     young man's story were absolutely true, then what hellish thing, what
     absolutely unforeseen and extraordinary calamity could have occurred
     between the time when he parted from his father, and the moment when,
     drawn back by his screams, he rushed into the glade? It was something
     terrible and deadly. What could it be? Might not the nature of the
     injuries reveal something to my medical instincts? I rang the bell
     and called for the weekly county paper, which contained a verbatim
     account of the inquest. In the surgeon's deposition it was stated
     that the posterior third of the left parietal bone and the left half
     of the occipital bone had been shattered by a heavy blow from a blunt
     weapon. I marked the spot upon my own head. Clearly such a blow must
     have been struck from behind. That was to some extent in favour of
     the accused, as when seen quarrelling he was face to face with his
     father. Still, it did not go for very much, for the older man might
     have turned his back before the blow fell. Still, it might be worth
     while to call Holmes' attention to it. Then there was the peculiar
     dying reference to a rat. What could that mean? It could not be
     delirium. A man dying from a sudden blow does not commonly become
     delirious. No, it was more likely to be an attempt to explain how he
     met his fate. But what could it indicate? I cudgelled my brains to
     find some possible explanation. And then the incident of the grey
     cloth seen by young McCarthy. If that were true the murderer must
     have dropped some part of his dress, presumably his overcoat, in his
     flight, and must have had the hardihood to return and to carry it
     away at the instant when the son was kneeling with his back turned
     not a dozen paces off. What a tissue of mysteries and improbabilities
     the whole thing was! I did not wonder at Lestrade's opinion, and yet
     I had so much faith in Sherlock Holmes' insight that I could not lose
     hope as long as every fresh fact seemed to strengthen his conviction
     of young McCarthy's innocence.

     It was late before Sherlock Holmes returned. He came back alone, for
     Lestrade was staying in lodgings in the town.

     "The glass still keeps very high," he remarked as he sat down. "It is
     of importance that it should not rain before we are able to go over
     the ground. On the other hand, a man should be at his very best and
     keenest for such nice work as that, and I did not wish to do it when
     fagged by a long journey. I have seen young McCarthy."

     "And what did you learn from him?"

     "Nothing."

     "Could he throw no light?"

     "None at all. I was inclined to think at one time that he knew who
     had done it and was screening him or her, but I am convinced now that
     he is as puzzled as everyone else. He is not a very quick-witted
     youth, though comely to look at and, I should think, sound at heart."

     "I cannot admire his taste," I remarked, "if it is indeed a fact that
     he was averse to a marriage with so charming a young lady as this
     Miss Turner."

     "Ah, thereby hangs a rather painful tale. This fellow is madly,
     insanely, in love with her, but some two years ago, when he was only
     a lad, and before he really knew her, for she had been away five
     years at a boarding-school, what does the idiot do but get into the
     clutches of a barmaid in Bristol and marry her at a registry office?
     No one knows a word of the matter, but you can imagine how maddening
     it must be to him to be upbraided for not doing what he would give
     his very eyes to do, but what he knows to be absolutely impossible.
     It was sheer frenzy of this sort which made him throw his hands up
     into the air when his father, at their last interview, was goading
     him on to propose to Miss Turner. On the other hand, he had no means
     of supporting himself, and his father, who was by all accounts a very
     hard man, would have thrown him over utterly had he known the truth.
     It was with his barmaid wife that he had spent the last three days in
     Bristol, and his father did not know where he was. Mark that point.
     It is of importance. Good has come out of evil, however, for the
     barmaid, finding from the papers that he is in serious trouble and
     likely to be hanged, has thrown him over utterly and has written to
     him to say that she has a husband already in the Bermuda Dockyard, so
     that there is really no tie between them. I think that that bit of
     news has consoled young McCarthy for all that he has suffered."

     "But if he is innocent, who has done it?"

     "Ah! who? I would call your attention very particularly to two
     points. One is that the murdered man had an appointment with someone
     at the pool, and that the someone could not have been his son, for
     his son was away, and he did not know when he would return. The
     second is that the murdered man was heard to cry 'Cooee!' before he
     knew that his son had returned. Those are the crucial points upon
     which the case depends. And now let us talk about George Meredith, if
     you please, and we shall leave all minor matters until to-morrow."

     There was no rain, as Holmes had foretold, and the morning broke
     bright and cloudless. At nine o'clock Lestrade called for us with the
     carriage, and we set off for Hatherley Farm and the Boscombe Pool.

     "There is serious news this morning," Lestrade observed. "It is said
     that Mr. Turner, of the Hall, is so ill that his life is despaired
     of."

     "An elderly man, I presume?" said Holmes.

     "About sixty; but his constitution has been shattered by his life
     abroad, and he has been in failing health for some time. This
     business has had a very bad effect upon him. He was an old friend of
     McCarthy's, and, I may add, a great benefactor to him, for I have
     learned that he gave him Hatherley Farm rent free."

     "Indeed! That is interesting," said Holmes.

     "Oh, yes! In a hundred other ways he has helped him. Everybody about
     here speaks of his kindness to him."

     "Really! Does it not strike you as a little singular that this
     McCarthy, who appears to have had little of his own, and to have been
     under such obligations to Turner, should still talk of marrying his
     son to Turner's daughter, who is, presumably, heiress to the estate,
     and that in such a very cocksure manner, as if it were merely a case
     of a proposal and all else would follow? It is the more strange,
     since we know that Turner himself was averse to the idea. The
     daughter told us as much. Do you not deduce something from that?"

     "We have got to the deductions and the inferences," said Lestrade,
     winking at me. "I find it hard enough to tackle facts, Holmes,
     without flying away after theories and fancies."

     "You are right," said Holmes demurely; "you do find it very hard to
     tackle the facts."

     "Anyhow, I have grasped one fact which you seem to find it difficult
     to get hold of," replied Lestrade with some warmth.

     "And that is--"

     "That McCarthy senior met his death from McCarthy junior and that all
     theories to the contrary are the merest moonshine."

     "Well, moonshine is a brighter thing than fog," said Holmes,
     laughing. "But I am very much mistaken if this is not Hatherley Farm
     upon the left."

     "Yes, that is it." It was a widespread, comfortable-looking building,
     two-storied, slate-roofed, with great yellow blotches of lichen upon
     the grey walls. The drawn blinds and the smokeless chimneys, however,
     gave it a stricken look, as though the weight of this horror still
     lay heavy upon it. We called at the door, when the maid, at Holmes'
     request, showed us the boots which her master wore at the time of his
     death, and also a pair of the son's, though not the pair which he had
     then had. Having measured these very carefully from seven or eight
     different points, Holmes desired to be led to the court-yard, from
     which we all followed the winding track which led to Boscombe Pool.

     Sherlock Holmes was transformed when he was hot upon such a scent as
     this. Men who had only known the quiet thinker and logician of Baker
     Street would have failed to recognise him. His face flushed and
     darkened. His brows were drawn into two hard black lines, while his
     eyes shone out from beneath them with a steely glitter. His face was
     bent downward, his shoulders bowed, his lips compressed, and the
     veins stood out like whipcord in his long, sinewy neck. His nostrils
     seemed to dilate with a purely animal lust for the chase, and his
     mind was so absolutely concentrated upon the matter before him that a
     question or remark fell unheeded upon his ears, or, at the most, only
     provoked a quick, impatient snarl in reply. Swiftly and silently he
     made his way along the track which ran through the meadows, and so by
     way of the woods to the Boscombe Pool. It was damp, marshy ground, as
     is all that district, and there were marks of many feet, both upon
     the path and amid the short grass which bounded it on either side.
     Sometimes Holmes would hurry on, sometimes stop dead, and once he
     made quite a little detour into the meadow. Lestrade and I walked
     behind him, the detective indifferent and contemptuous, while I
     watched my friend with the interest which sprang from the conviction
     that every one of his actions was directed towards a definite end.

     The Boscombe Pool, which is a little reed-girt sheet of water some
     fifty yards across, is situated at the boundary between the Hatherley
     Farm and the private park of the wealthy Mr. Turner. Above the woods
     which lined it upon the farther side we could see the red, jutting
     pinnacles which marked the site of the rich landowner's dwelling. On
     the Hatherley side of the pool the woods grew very thick, and there
     was a narrow belt of sodden grass twenty paces across between the
     edge of the trees and the reeds which lined the lake. Lestrade showed
     us the exact spot at which the body had been found, and, indeed, so
     moist was the ground, that I could plainly see the traces which had
     been left by the fall of the stricken man. To Holmes, as I could see
     by his eager face and peering eyes, very many other things were to be
     read upon the trampled grass. He ran round, like a dog who is picking
     up a scent, and then turned upon my companion.

     "What did you go into the pool for?" he asked.

     "I fished about with a rake. I thought there might be some weapon or
     other trace. But how on earth--"

     "Oh, tut, tut! I have no time! That left foot of yours with its
     inward twist is all over the place. A mole could trace it, and there
     it vanishes among the reeds. Oh, how simple it would all have been
     had I been here before they came like a herd of buffalo and wallowed
     all over it. Here is where the party with the lodge-keeper came, and
     they have covered all tracks for six or eight feet round the body.
     But here are three separate tracks of the same feet." He drew out a
     lens and lay down upon his waterproof to have a better view, talking
     all the time rather to himself than to us. "These are young
     McCarthy's feet. Twice he was walking, and once he ran swiftly, so
     that the soles are deeply marked and the heels hardly visible. That
     bears out his story. He ran when he saw his father on the ground.
     Then here are the father's feet as he paced up and down. What is
     this, then? It is the butt-end of the gun as the son stood listening.
     And this? Ha, ha! What have we here? Tiptoes! tiptoes! Square, too,
     quite unusual boots! They come, they go, they come again--of course
     that was for the cloak. Now where did they come from?" He ran up and
     down, sometimes losing, sometimes finding the track until we were
     well within the edge of the wood and under the shadow of a great
     beech, the largest tree in the neighbourhood. Holmes traced his way
     to the farther side of this and lay down once more upon his face with
     a little cry of satisfaction. For a long time he remained there,
     turning over the leaves and dried sticks, gathering up what seemed to
     me to be dust into an envelope and examining with his lens not only
     the ground but even the bark of the tree as far as he could reach. A
     jagged stone was lying among the moss, and this also he carefully
     examined and retained. Then he followed a pathway through the wood
     until he came to the highroad, where all traces were lost.

     "It has been a case of considerable interest," he remarked, returning
     to his natural manner. "I fancy that this grey house on the right
     must be the lodge. I think that I will go in and have a word with
     Moran, and perhaps write a little note. Having done that, we may
     drive back to our luncheon. You may walk to the cab, and I shall be
     with you presently."

     It was about ten minutes before we regained our cab and drove back
     into Ross, Holmes still carrying with him the stone which he had
     picked up in the wood.

     "This may interest you, Lestrade," he remarked, holding it out.  "The
     murder was done with it."

     "I see no marks."

     "There are none."

     "How do you know, then?"

     "The grass was growing under it. It had only lain there a few days.
     There was no sign of a place whence it had been taken. It corresponds
     with the injuries. There is no sign of any other weapon."

     "And the murderer?"

     "Is a tall man, left-handed, limps with the right leg, wears
     thick-soled shooting-boots and a grey cloak, smokes Indian cigars,
     uses a cigar-holder, and carries a blunt pen-knife in his pocket.
     There are several other indications, but these may be enough to aid
     us in our search."

     Lestrade laughed. "I am afraid that I am still a sceptic," he said.
     "Theories are all very well, but we have to deal with a hard-headed
     British jury."

     "Nous verrons," answered Holmes calmly. "You work your own method,
     and I shall work mine. I shall be busy this afternoon, and shall
     probably return to London by the evening train."

     "And leave your case unfinished?"

     "No, finished."

     "But the mystery?"

     "It is solved."

     "Who was the criminal, then?"

     "The gentleman I describe."

     "But who is he?"

     "Surely it would not be difficult to find out. This is not such a
     populous neighbourhood."

     Lestrade shrugged his shoulders. "I am a practical man," he said,
     "and I really cannot undertake to go about the country looking for a
     left-handed gentleman with a game leg. I should become the
     laughing-stock of Scotland Yard."

     "All right," said Holmes quietly. "I have given you the chance. Here
     are your lodgings. Good-bye. I shall drop you a line before I leave."

     Having left Lestrade at his rooms, we drove to our hotel, where we
     found lunch upon the table. Holmes was silent and buried in thought
     with a pained expression upon his face, as one who finds himself in a
     perplexing position.

     "Look here, Watson," he said when the cloth was cleared "just sit
     down in this chair and let me preach to you for a little. I don't
     know quite what to do, and I should value your advice. Light a cigar
     and let me expound."

     "Pray do so."

     "Well, now, in considering this case there are two points about young
     McCarthy's narrative which struck us both instantly, although they
     impressed me in his favour and you against him. One was the fact that
     his father should, according to his account, cry 'Cooee!' before
     seeing him. The other was his singular dying reference to a rat. He
     mumbled several words, you understand, but that was all that caught
     the son's ear. Now from this double point our research must commence,
     and we will begin it by presuming that what the lad says is
     absolutely true."

     "What of this 'Cooee!' then?"

     "Well, obviously it could not have been meant for the son. The son,
     as far as he knew, was in Bristol. It was mere chance that he was
     within earshot. The 'Cooee!' was meant to attract the attention of
     whoever it was that he had the appointment with. But 'Cooee' is a
     distinctly Australian cry, and one which is used between Australians.
     There is a strong presumption that the person whom McCarthy expected
     to meet him at Boscombe Pool was someone who had been in Australia."

     "What of the rat, then?"

     Sherlock Holmes took a folded paper from his pocket and flattened it
     out on the table. "This is a map of the Colony of Victoria," he said.
     "I wired to Bristol for it last night." He put his hand over part of
     the map. "What do you read?"

     "ARAT," I read.

     "And now?" He raised his hand.

     "BALLARAT."

     "Quite so. That was the word the man uttered, and of which his son
     only caught the last two syllables. He was trying to utter the name
     of his murderer. So and so, of Ballarat."

     "It is wonderful!" I exclaimed.

     "It is obvious. And now, you see, I had narrowed the field down
     considerably. The possession of a grey garment was a third point
     which, granting the son's statement to be correct, was a certainty.
     We have come now out of mere vagueness to the definite conception of
     an Australian from Ballarat with a grey cloak."

     "Certainly."

     "And one who was at home in the district, for the pool can only be
     approached by the farm or by the estate, where strangers could hardly
     wander."

     "Quite so."

     "Then comes our expedition of to-day. By an examination of the ground
     I gained the trifling details which I gave to that imbecile Lestrade,
     as to the personality of the criminal."

     "But how did you gain them?"

     "You know my method. It is founded upon the observation of trifles."

     "His height I know that you might roughly judge from the length of
     his stride. His boots, too, might be told from their traces."

     "Yes, they were peculiar boots."

     "But his lameness?"

     "The impression of his right foot was always less distinct than his
     left. He put less weight upon it. Why? Because he limped--he was
     lame."

     "But his left-handedness."

     "You were yourself struck by the nature of the injury as recorded by
     the surgeon at the inquest. The blow was struck from immediately
     behind, and yet was upon the left side. Now, how can that be unless
     it were by a left-handed man? He had stood behind that tree during
     the interview between the father and son. He had even smoked there. I
     found the ash of a cigar, which my special knowledge of tobacco ashes
     enables me to pronounce as an Indian cigar. I have, as you know,
     devoted some attention to this, and written a little monograph on the
     ashes of 140 different varieties of pipe, cigar, and cigarette
     tobacco. Having found the ash, I then looked round and discovered the
     stump among the moss where he had tossed it. It was an Indian cigar,
     of the variety which are rolled in Rotterdam."

     "And the cigar-holder?"

     "I could see that the end had not been in his mouth. Therefore he
     used a holder. The tip had been cut off, not bitten off, but the cut
     was not a clean one, so I deduced a blunt pen-knife."

     "Holmes," I said, "you have drawn a net round this man from which he
     cannot escape, and you have saved an innocent human life as truly as
     if you had cut the cord which was hanging him. I see the direction in
     which all this points. The culprit is--"

     "Mr. John Turner," cried the hotel waiter, opening the door of our
     sitting-room, and ushering in a visitor.

     The man who entered was a strange and impressive figure. His slow,
     limping step and bowed shoulders gave the appearance of decrepitude,
     and yet his hard, deep-lined, craggy features, and his enormous limbs
     showed that he was possessed of unusual strength of body and of
     character. His tangled beard, grizzled hair, and outstanding,
     drooping eyebrows combined to give an air of dignity and power to his
     appearance, but his face was of an ashen white, while his lips and
     the corners of his nostrils were tinged with a shade of blue. It was
     clear to me at a glance that he was in the grip of some deadly and
     chronic disease.

     "Pray sit down on the sofa," said Holmes gently. "You had my note?"

     "Yes, the lodge-keeper brought it up. You said that you wished to see
     me here to avoid scandal."

     "I thought people would talk if I went to the Hall."

     "And why did you wish to see me?" He looked across at my companion
     with despair in his weary eyes, as though his question was already
     answered.

     "Yes," said Holmes, answering the look rather than the words. "It is
     so. I know all about McCarthy."

     The old man sank his face in his hands. "God help me!" he cried. "But
     I would not have let the young man come to harm. I give you my word
     that I would have spoken out if it went against him at the Assizes."

     "I am glad to hear you say so," said Holmes gravely.

     "I would have spoken now had it not been for my dear girl. It would
     break her heart--it will break her heart when she hears that I am
     arrested."

     "It may not come to that," said Holmes.

     "What?"

     "I am no official agent. I understand that it was your daughter who
     required my presence here, and I am acting in her interests. Young
     McCarthy must be got off, however."

     "I am a dying man," said old Turner. "I have had diabetes for years.
     My doctor says it is a question whether I shall live a month. Yet I
     would rather die under my own roof than in a jail."

     Holmes rose and sat down at the table with his pen in his hand and a
     bundle of paper before him. "Just tell us the truth," he said. "I
     shall jot down the facts. You will sign it, and Watson here can
     witness it. Then I could produce your confession at the last
     extremity to save young McCarthy. I promise you that I shall not use
     it unless it is absolutely needed."

     "It's as well," said the old man; "it's a question whether I shall
     live to the Assizes, so it matters little to me, but I should wish to
     spare Alice the shock. And now I will make the thing clear to you; it
     has been a long time in the acting, but will not take me long to
     tell.

     "You didn't know this dead man, McCarthy. He was a devil incarnate. I
     tell you that. God keep you out of the clutches of such a man as he.
     His grip has been upon me these twenty years, and he has blasted my
     life. I'll tell you first how I came to be in his power.

     "It was in the early '60's at the diggings. I was a young chap then,
     hot-blooded and reckless, ready to turn my hand at anything; I got
     among bad companions, took to drink, had no luck with my claim, took
     to the bush, and in a word became what you would call over here a
     highway robber. There were six of us, and we had a wild, free life of
     it, sticking up a station from time to time, or stopping the wagons
     on the road to the diggings. Black Jack of Ballarat was the name I
     went under, and our party is still remembered in the colony as the
     Ballarat Gang.

     "One day a gold convoy came down from Ballarat to Melbourne, and we
     lay in wait for it and attacked it. There were six troopers and six
     of us, so it was a close thing, but we emptied four of their saddles
     at the first volley. Three of our boys were killed, however, before
     we got the swag. I put my pistol to the head of the wagon-driver, who
     was this very man McCarthy. I wish to the Lord that I had shot him
     then, but I spared him, though I saw his wicked little eyes fixed on
     my face, as though to remember every feature. We got away with the
     gold, became wealthy men, and made our way over to England without
     being suspected. There I parted from my old pals and determined to
     settle down to a quiet and respectable life. I bought this estate,
     which chanced to be in the market, and I set myself to do a little
     good with my money, to make up for the way in which I had earned it.
     I married, too, and though my wife died young she left me my dear
     little Alice. Even when she was just a baby her wee hand seemed to
     lead me down the right path as nothing else had ever done. In a word,
     I turned over a new leaf and did my best to make up for the past. All
     was going well when McCarthy laid his grip upon me.

     "I had gone up to town about an investment, and I met him in Regent
     Street with hardly a coat to his back or a boot to his foot.

     "'Here we are, Jack,' says he, touching me on the arm; 'we'll be as
     good as a family to you. There's two of us, me and my son, and you
     can have the keeping of us. If you don't--it's a fine, law-abiding
     country is England, and there's always a policeman within hail.'

     "Well, down they came to the west country, there was no shaking them
     off, and there they have lived rent free on my best land ever since.
     There was no rest for me, no peace, no forgetfulness; turn where I
     would, there was his cunning, grinning face at my elbow. It grew
     worse as Alice grew up, for he soon saw I was more afraid of her
     knowing my past than of the police. Whatever he wanted he must have,
     and whatever it was I gave him without question, land, money, houses,
     until at last he asked a thing which I could not give. He asked for
     Alice.

     "His son, you see, had grown up, and so had my girl, and as I was
     known to be in weak health, it seemed a fine stroke to him that his
     lad should step into the whole property. But there I was firm. I
     would not have his cursed stock mixed with mine; not that I had any
     dislike to the lad, but his blood was in him, and that was enough. I
     stood firm. McCarthy threatened. I braved him to do his worst. We
     were to meet at the pool midway between our houses to talk it over.

     "When I went down there I found him talking with his son, so I smoked
     a cigar and waited behind a tree until he should be alone. But as I
     listened to his talk all that was black and bitter in me seemed to
     come uppermost. He was urging his son to marry my daughter with as
     little regard for what she might think as if she were a slut from off
     the streets. It drove me mad to think that I and all that I held most
     dear should be in the power of such a man as this. Could I not snap
     the bond? I was already a dying and a desperate man. Though clear of
     mind and fairly strong of limb, I knew that my own fate was sealed.
     But my memory and my girl! Both could be saved if I could but silence
     that foul tongue. I did it, Mr. Holmes. I would do it again. Deeply
     as I have sinned, I have led a life of martyrdom to atone for it. But
     that my girl should be entangled in the same meshes which held me was
     more than I could suffer. I struck him down with no more compunction
     than if he had been some foul and venomous beast. His cry brought
     back his son; but I had gained the cover of the wood, though I was
     forced to go back to fetch the cloak which I had dropped in my
     flight. That is the true story, gentlemen, of all that occurred."

     "Well, it is not for me to judge you," said Holmes as the old man
     signed the statement which had been drawn out. "I pray that we may
     never be exposed to such a temptation."

     "I pray not, sir. And what do you intend to do?"

     "In view of your health, nothing. You are yourself aware that you
     will soon have to answer for your deed at a higher court than the
     Assizes. I will keep your confession, and if McCarthy is condemned I
     shall be forced to use it. If not, it shall never be seen by mortal
     eye; and your secret, whether you be alive or dead, shall be safe
     with us."

     "Farewell, then," said the old man solemnly. "Your own deathbeds,
     when they come, will be the easier for the thought of the peace which
     you have given to mine." Tottering and shaking in all his giant
     frame, he stumbled slowly from the room.

     "God help us!" said Holmes after a long silence. "Why does fate play
     such tricks with poor, helpless worms? I never hear of such a case as
     this that I do not think of Baxter's words, and say, 'There, but for
     the grace of God, goes Sherlock Holmes.'"

     James McCarthy was acquitted at the Assizes on the strength of a
     number of objections which had been drawn out by Holmes and submitted
     to the defending counsel. Old Turner lived for seven months after our
     interview, but he is now dead; and there is every prospect that the
     son and daughter may come to live happily together in ignorance of
     the black cloud which rests upon their past.






                              THE FIVE ORANGE PIPS

     When I glance over my notes and records of the Sherlock Holmes cases
     between the years '82 and '90, I am faced by so many which present
     strange and interesting features that it is no easy matter to know
     which to choose and which to leave. Some, however, have already
     gained publicity through the papers, and others have not offered a
     field for those peculiar qualities which my friend possessed in so
     high a degree, and which it is the object of these papers to
     illustrate. Some, too, have baffled his analytical skill, and would
     be, as narratives, beginnings without an ending, while others have
     been but partially cleared up, and have their explanations founded
     rather upon conjecture and surmise than on that absolute logical
     proof which was so dear to him. There is, however, one of these last
     which was so remarkable in its details and so startling in its
     results that I am tempted to give some account of it in spite of the
     fact that there are points in connection with it which never have
     been, and probably never will be, entirely cleared up.

     The year '87 furnished us with a long series of cases of greater or
     less interest, of which I retain the records. Among my headings under
     this one twelve months I find an account of the adventure of the
     Paradol Chamber, of the Amateur Mendicant Society, who held a
     luxurious club in the lower vault of a furniture warehouse, of the
     facts connected with the loss of the British barque "Sophy Anderson",
     of the singular adventures of the Grice Patersons in the island of
     Uffa, and finally of the Camberwell poisoning case. In the latter, as
     may be remembered, Sherlock Holmes was able, by winding up the dead
     man's watch, to prove that it had been wound up two hours before, and
     that therefore the deceased had gone to bed within that time--a
     deduction which was of the greatest importance in clearing up the
     case. All these I may sketch out at some future date, but none of
     them present such singular features as the strange train of
     circumstances which I have now taken up my pen to describe.

     It was in the latter days of September, and the equinoctial gales had
     set in with exceptional violence. All day the wind had screamed and
     the rain had beaten against the windows, so that even here in the
     heart of great, hand-made London we were forced to raise our minds
     for the instant from the routine of life and to recognise the
     presence of those great elemental forces which shriek at mankind
     through the bars of his civilisation, like untamed beasts in a cage.
     As evening drew in, the storm grew higher and louder, and the wind
     cried and sobbed like a child in the chimney. Sherlock Holmes sat
     moodily at one side of the fireplace cross-indexing his records of
     crime, while I at the other was deep in one of Clark Russell's fine
     sea-stories until the howl of the gale from without seemed to blend
     with the text, and the splash of the rain to lengthen out into the
     long swash of the sea waves. My wife was on a visit to her mother's,
     and for a few days I was a dweller once more in my old quarters at
     Baker Street.

     "Why," said I, glancing up at my companion, "that was surely the
     bell. Who could come to-night? Some friend of yours, perhaps?"

     "Except yourself I have none," he answered. "I do not encourage
     visitors."

     "A client, then?"

     "If so, it is a serious case. Nothing less would bring a man out on
     such a day and at such an hour. But I take it that it is more likely
     to be some crony of the landlady's."

     Sherlock Holmes was wrong in his conjecture, however, for there came
     a step in the passage and a tapping at the door. He stretched out his
     long arm to turn the lamp away from himself and towards the vacant
     chair upon which a newcomer must sit.

     "Come in!" said he.

     The man who entered was young, some two-and-twenty at the outside,
     well-groomed and trimly clad, with something of refinement and
     delicacy in his bearing. The streaming umbrella which he held in his
     hand, and his long shining waterproof told of the fierce weather
     through which he had come. He looked about him anxiously in the glare
     of the lamp, and I could see that his face was pale and his eyes
     heavy, like those of a man who is weighed down with some great
     anxiety.

     "I owe you an apology," he said, raising his golden pince-nez to his
     eyes. "I trust that I am not intruding. I fear that I have brought
     some traces of the storm and rain into your snug chamber."

     "Give me your coat and umbrella," said Holmes. "They may rest here on
     the hook and will be dry presently. You have come up from the
     south-west, I see."

     "Yes, from Horsham."

     "That clay and chalk mixture which I see upon your toe caps is quite
     distinctive."

     "I have come for advice."

     "That is easily got."

     "And help."

     "That is not always so easy."

     "I have heard of you, Mr. Holmes. I heard from Major Prendergast how
     you saved him in the Tankerville Club scandal."

     "Ah, of course. He was wrongfully accused of cheating at cards."

     "He said that you could solve anything."

     "He said too much."

     "That you are never beaten."

     "I have been beaten four times--three times by men, and once by a
     woman."

     "But what is that compared with the number of your successes?"

     "It is true that I have been generally successful."

     "Then you may be so with me."

     "I beg that you will draw your chair up to the fire and favour me
     with some details as to your case."

     "It is no ordinary one."

     "None of those which come to me are. I am the last court of appeal."

     "And yet I question, sir, whether, in all your experience, you have
     ever listened to a more mysterious and inexplicable chain of events
     than those which have happened in my own family."

     "You fill me with interest," said Holmes. "Pray give us the essential
     facts from the commencement, and I can afterwards question you as to
     those details which seem to me to be most important."

     The young man pulled his chair up and pushed his wet feet out towards
     the blaze.

     "My name," said he, "is John Openshaw, but my own affairs have, as
     far as I can understand, little to do with this awful business. It is
     a hereditary matter; so in order to give you an idea of the facts, I
     must go back to the commencement of the affair.

     "You must know that my grandfather had two sons--my uncle Elias and
     my father Joseph. My father had a small factory at Coventry, which he
     enlarged at the time of the invention of bicycling. He was a patentee
     of the Openshaw unbreakable tire, and his business met with such
     success that he was able to sell it and to retire upon a handsome
     competence.

     "My uncle Elias emigrated to America when he was a young man and
     became a planter in Florida, where he was reported to have done very
     well. At the time of the war he fought in Jackson's army, and
     afterwards under Hood, where he rose to be a colonel. When Lee laid
     down his arms my uncle returned to his plantation, where he remained
     for three or four years. About 1869 or 1870 he came back to Europe
     and took a small estate in Sussex, near Horsham. He had made a very
     considerable fortune in the States, and his reason for leaving them
     was his aversion to the negroes, and his dislike of the Republican
     policy in extending the franchise to them. He was a singular man,
     fierce and quick-tempered, very foul-mouthed when he was angry, and
     of a most retiring disposition. During all the years that he lived at
     Horsham, I doubt if ever he set foot in the town. He had a garden and
     two or three fields round his house, and there he would take his
     exercise, though very often for weeks on end he would never leave his
     room. He drank a great deal of brandy and smoked very heavily, but he
     would see no society and did not want any friends, not even his own
     brother.

     "He didn't mind me; in fact, he took a fancy to me, for at the time
     when he saw me first I was a youngster of twelve or so. This would be
     in the year 1878, after he had been eight or nine years in England.
     He begged my father to let me live with him and he was very kind to
     me in his way. When he was sober he used to be fond of playing
     backgammon and draughts with me, and he would make me his
     representative both with the servants and with the tradespeople, so
     that by the time that I was sixteen I was quite master of the house.
     I kept all the keys and could go where I liked and do what I liked,
     so long as I did not disturb him in his privacy. There was one
     singular exception, however, for he had a single room, a lumber-room
     up among the attics, which was invariably locked, and which he would
     never permit either me or anyone else to enter. With a boy's
     curiosity I have peeped through the keyhole, but I was never able to
     see more than such a collection of old trunks and bundles as would be
     expected in such a room.

     "One day--it was in March, 1883--a letter with a foreign stamp lay
     upon the table in front of the colonel's plate. It was not a common
     thing for him to receive letters, for his bills were all paid in
     ready money, and he had no friends of any sort. 'From India!' said he
     as he took it up, 'Pondicherry postmark! What can this be?' Opening
     it hurriedly, out there jumped five little dried orange pips, which
     pattered down upon his plate. I began to laugh at this, but the laugh
     was struck from my lips at the sight of his face. His lip had fallen,
     his eyes were protruding, his skin the colour of putty, and he glared
     at the envelope which he still held in his trembling hand, 'K. K.
     K.!' he shrieked, and then, 'My God, my God, my sins have overtaken
     me!'

     "'What is it, uncle?' I cried.

     "'Death,' said he, and rising from the table he retired to his room,
     leaving me palpitating with horror. I took up the envelope and saw
     scrawled in red ink upon the inner flap, just above the gum, the
     letter K three times repeated. There was nothing else save the five
     dried pips. What could be the reason of his overpowering terror? I
     left the breakfast-table, and as I ascended the stair I met him
     coming down with an old rusty key, which must have belonged to the
     attic, in one hand, and a small brass box, like a cashbox, in the
     other.

     "'They may do what they like, but I'll checkmate them still,' said he
     with an oath. 'Tell Mary that I shall want a fire in my room to-day,
     and send down to Fordham, the Horsham lawyer.'

     "I did as he ordered, and when the lawyer arrived I was asked to step
     up to the room. The fire was burning brightly, and in the grate there
     was a mass of black, fluffy ashes, as of burned paper, while the
     brass box stood open and empty beside it. As I glanced at the box I
     noticed, with a start, that upon the lid was printed the treble K
     which I had read in the morning upon the envelope.

     "'I wish you, John,' said my uncle, 'to witness my will. I leave my
     estate, with all its advantages and all its disadvantages, to my
     brother, your father, whence it will, no doubt, descend to you. If
     you can enjoy it in peace, well and good! If you find you cannot,
     take my advice, my boy, and leave it to your deadliest enemy. I am
     sorry to give you such a two-edged thing, but I can't say what turn
     things are going to take. Kindly sign the paper where Mr. Fordham
     shows you.'

     "I signed the paper as directed, and the lawyer took it away with
     him. The singular incident made, as you may think, the deepest
     impression upon me, and I pondered over it and turned it every way in
     my mind without being able to make anything of it. Yet I could not
     shake off the vague feeling of dread which it left behind, though the
     sensation grew less keen as the weeks passed and nothing happened to
     disturb the usual routine of our lives. I could see a change in my
     uncle, however. He drank more than ever, and he was less inclined for
     any sort of society. Most of his time he would spend in his room,
     with the door locked upon the inside, but sometimes he would emerge
     in a sort of drunken frenzy and would burst out of the house and tear
     about the garden with a revolver in his hand, screaming out that he
     was afraid of no man, and that he was not to be cooped up, like a
     sheep in a pen, by man or devil. When these hot fits were over,
     however, he would rush tumultuously in at the door and lock and bar
     it behind him, like a man who can brazen it out no longer against the
     terror which lies at the roots of his soul. At such times I have seen
     his face, even on a cold day, glisten with moisture, as though it
     were new raised from a basin.

     "Well, to come to an end of the matter, Mr. Holmes, and not to abuse
     your patience, there came a night when he made one of those drunken
     sallies from which he never came back. We found him, when we went to
     search for him, face downward in a little green-scummed pool, which
     lay at the foot of the garden. There was no sign of any violence, and
     the water was but two feet deep, so that the jury, having regard to
     his known eccentricity, brought in a verdict of 'suicide.' But I, who
     knew how he winced from the very thought of death, had much ado to
     persuade myself that he had gone out of his way to meet it. The
     matter passed, however, and my father entered into possession of the
     estate, and of some ?4,000, which lay to his credit at the bank."

     "One moment," Holmes interposed, "your statement is, I foresee, one
     of the most remarkable to which I have ever listened. Let me have the
     date of the reception by your uncle of the letter, and the date of
     his supposed suicide."

     "The letter arrived on March 10, 1883. His death was seven weeks
     later, upon the night of May 2nd."

     "Thank you. Pray proceed."

     "When my father took over the Horsham property, he, at my request,
     made a careful examination of the attic, which had been always locked
     up. We found the brass box there, although its contents had been
     destroyed. On the inside of the cover was a paper label, with the
     initials of K. K. K. repeated upon it, and 'Letters, memoranda,
     receipts, and a register' written beneath. These, we presume,
     indicated the nature of the papers which had been destroyed by
     Colonel Openshaw. For the rest, there was nothing of much importance
     in the attic save a great many scattered papers and note-books
     bearing upon my uncle's life in America. Some of them were of the war
     time and showed that he had done his duty well and had borne the
     repute of a brave soldier. Others were of a date during the
     reconstruction of the Southern states, and were mostly concerned with
     politics, for he had evidently taken a strong part in opposing the
     carpet-bag politicians who had been sent down from the North.

     "Well, it was the beginning of '84 when my father came to live at
     Horsham, and all went as well as possible with us until the January
     of '85. On the fourth day after the new year I heard my father give a
     sharp cry of surprise as we sat together at the breakfast-table.
     There he was, sitting with a newly opened envelope in one hand and
     five dried orange pips in the outstretched palm of the other one. He
     had always laughed at what he called my cock-and-bull story about the
     colonel, but he looked very scared and puzzled now that the same
     thing had come upon himself.

     "'Why, what on earth does this mean, John?' he stammered.

     "My heart had turned to lead. 'It is K. K. K.,' said I.

     "He looked inside the envelope. 'So it is,' he cried. 'Here are the
     very letters. But what is this written above them?'

     "'Put the papers on the sundial,' I read, peeping over his shoulder.

     "'What papers? What sundial?' he asked.

     '"'The sundial in the garden. There is no other, said I; 'but the
     papers must be those that are destroyed.'

     "'Pooh!' said he, gripping hard at his courage. 'We are in a
     civilised land here, and we can't have tomfoolery of this kind. Where
     does the thing come from?'

     "'From Dundee,' I answered, glancing at the postmark.

     "'Some preposterous practical joke,' said he. 'What have I to do with
     sundials and papers? I shall take no notice of such nonsense.'

     "'I should certainly speak to the police,' I said.

     "'And be laughed at for my pains. Nothing of the sort.'

     "'Then let me do so?'

     "'No, I forbid you. I won't have a fuss made about such nonsense.'

     "It was in vain to argue with him, for he was a very obstinate man. I
     went about, however, with a heart which was full of forebodings.

     "On the third day after the coming of the letter my father went from
     home to visit an old friend of his, Major Freebody, who is in command
     of one of the forts upon Portsdown Hill. I was glad that he should
     go, for it seemed to me that he was farther from danger when he was
     away from home. In that, however, I was in error. Upon the second day
     of his absence I received a telegram from the major, imploring me to
     come at once. My father had fallen over one of the deep chalk-pits
     which abound in the neighbourhood, and was lying senseless, with a
     shattered skull. I hurried to him, but he passed away without having
     ever recovered his consciousness. He had, as it appears, been
     returning from Fareham in the twilight, and as the country was
     unknown to him, and the chalk-pit unfenced, the jury had no
     hesitation in bringing in a verdict of 'death from accidental
     causes.' Carefully as I examined every fact connected with his death,
     I was unable to find anything which could suggest the idea of murder.
     There were no signs of violence, no footmarks, no robbery, no record
     of strangers having been seen upon the roads. And yet I need not tell
     you that my mind was far from at ease, and that I was well-nigh
     certain that some foul plot had been woven round him.

     "In this sinister way I came into my inheritance. You will ask me why
     I did not dispose of it? I answer, because I was well convinced that
     our troubles were in some way dependent upon an incident in my
     uncle's life, and that the danger would be as pressing in one house
     as in another.

     "It was in January, '85, that my poor father met his end, and two
     years and eight months have elapsed since then. During that time I
     have lived happily at Horsham, and I had begun to hope that this
     curse had passed away from the family, and that it had ended with the
     last generation. I had begun to take comfort too soon, however;
     yesterday morning the blow fell in the very shape in which it had
     come upon my father."

     The young man took from his waistcoat a crumpled envelope, and
     turning to the table he shook out upon it five little dried orange
     pips.

     "This is the envelope," he continued. "The postmark is
     London--eastern division. Within are the very words which were upon
     my father's last message: 'K. K. K.'; and then 'Put the papers on the
     sundial.'"

     "What have you done?" asked Holmes.

     "Nothing."

     "Nothing?"

     "To tell the truth"--he sank his face into his thin, white hands--"I
     have felt helpless. I have felt like one of those poor rabbits when
     the snake is writhing towards it. I seem to be in the grasp of some
     resistless, inexorable evil, which no foresight and no precautions
     can guard against."

     "Tut! tut!" cried Sherlock Holmes. "You must act, man, or you are
     lost. Nothing but energy can save you. This is no time for despair."

     "I have seen the police."

     "Ah!"

     "But they listened to my story with a smile. I am convinced that the
     inspector has formed the opinion that the letters are all practical
     jokes, and that the deaths of my relations were really accidents, as
     the jury stated, and were not to be connected with the warnings."

     Holmes shook his clenched hands in the air. "Incredible imbecility!"
     he cried.

     "They have, however, allowed me a policeman, who may remain in the
     house with me."

     "Has he come with you to-night?"

     "No. His orders were to stay in the house."

     Again Holmes raved in the air.

     "Why did you come to me," he cried, "and, above all, why did you not
     come at once?"

     "I did not know. It was only to-day that I spoke to Major Prendergast
     about my troubles and was advised by him to come to you."

     "It is really two days since you had the letter. We should have acted
     before this. You have no further evidence, I suppose, than that which
     you have placed before us--no suggestive detail which might help us?"

     "There is one thing," said John Openshaw. He rummaged in his coat
     pocket, and, drawing out a piece of discoloured, blue-tinted paper,
     he laid it out upon the table. "I have some remembrance," said he,
     "that on the day when my uncle burned the papers I observed that the
     small, unburned margins which lay amid the ashes were of this
     particular colour. I found this single sheet upon the floor of his
     room, and I am inclined to think that it may be one of the papers
     which has, perhaps, fluttered out from among the others, and in that
     way has escaped destruction. Beyond the mention of pips, I do not see
     that it helps us much. I think myself that it is a page from some
     private diary. The writing is undoubtedly my uncle's."

     Holmes moved the lamp, and we both bent over the sheet of paper,
     which showed by its ragged edge that it had indeed been torn from a
     book. It was headed, "March, 1869," and beneath were the following
     enigmatical notices:

     4th. Hudson came. Same old platform.
     7th. Set the pips on McCauley, Paramore, and John Swain, of St.
     Augustine.
     9th. McCauley cleared.
     10th. John Swain cleared.
     12th. Visited Paramore. All well.

     "Thank you!" said Holmes, folding up the paper and returning it to
     our visitor. "And now you must on no account lose another instant. We
     cannot spare time even to discuss what you have told me. You must get
     home instantly and act."

     "What shall I do?"

     "There is but one thing to do. It must be done at once. You must put
     this piece of paper which you have shown us into the brass box which
     you have described. You must also put in a note to say that all the
     other papers were burned by your uncle, and that this is the only one
     which remains. You must assert that in such words as will carry
     conviction with them. Having done this, you must at once put the box
     out upon the sundial, as directed. Do you understand?"

     "Entirely."

     "Do not think of revenge, or anything of the sort, at present. I
     think that we may gain that by means of the law; but we have our web
     to weave, while theirs is already woven. The first consideration is
     to remove the pressing danger which threatens you. The second is to
     clear up the mystery and to punish the guilty parties."

     "I thank you," said the young man, rising and pulling on his
     overcoat. "You have given me fresh life and hope. I shall certainly
     do as you advise."

     "Do not lose an instant. And, above all, take care of yourself in the
     meanwhile, for I do not think that there can be a doubt that you are
     threatened by a very real and imminent danger. How do you go back?"

     "By train from Waterloo."

     "It is not yet nine. The streets will be crowded, so I trust that you
     may be in safety. And yet you cannot guard yourself too closely."

     "I am armed."

     "That is well. To-morrow I shall set to work upon your case."

     "I shall see you at Horsham, then?"

     "No, your secret lies in London. It is there that I shall seek it."

     "Then I shall call upon you in a day, or in two days, with news as to
     the box and the papers. I shall take your advice in every
     particular." He shook hands with us and took his leave. Outside the
     wind still screamed and the rain splashed and pattered against the
     windows. This strange, wild story seemed to have come to us from amid
     the mad elements--blown in upon us like a sheet of sea-weed in a
     gale--and now to have been reabsorbed by them once more.

     Sherlock Holmes sat for some time in silence, with his head sunk
     forward and his eyes bent upon the red glow of the fire. Then he lit
     his pipe, and leaning back in his chair he watched the blue
     smoke-rings as they chased each other up to the ceiling.

     "I think, Watson," he remarked at last, "that of all our cases we
     have had none more fantastic than this."

     "Save, perhaps, the Sign of Four."

     "Well, yes. Save, perhaps, that. And yet this John Openshaw seems to
     me to be walking amid even greater perils than did the Sholtos."

     "But have you," I asked, "formed any definite conception as to what
     these perils are?"

     "There can be no question as to their nature," he answered.

     "Then what are they? Who is this K. K. K., and why does he pursue
     this unhappy family?"

     Sherlock Holmes closed his eyes and placed his elbows upon the arms
     of his chair, with his finger-tips together. "The ideal reasoner," he
     remarked, "would, when he had once been shown a single fact in all
     its bearings, deduce from it not only all the chain of events which
     led up to it but also all the results which would follow from it. As
     Cuvier could correctly describe a whole animal by the contemplation
     of a single bone, so the observer who has thoroughly understood one
     link in a series of incidents should be able to accurately state all
     the other ones, both before and after. We have not yet grasped the
     results which the reason alone can attain to. Problems may be solved
     in the study which have baffled all those who have sought a solution
     by the aid of their senses. To carry the art, however, to its highest
     pitch, it is necessary that the reasoner should be able to utilise
     all the facts which have come to his knowledge; and this in itself
     implies, as you will readily see, a possession of all knowledge,
     which, even in these days of free education and encyclopaedias, is a
     somewhat rare accomplishment. It is not so impossible, however, that
     a man should possess all knowledge which is likely to be useful to
     him in his work, and this I have endeavoured in my case to do. If I
     remember rightly, you on one occasion, in the early days of our
     friendship, defined my limits in a very precise fashion."

     "Yes," I answered, laughing. "It was a singular document. Philosophy,
     astronomy, and politics were marked at zero, I remember. Botany
     variable, geology profound as regards the mud-stains from any region
     within fifty miles of town, chemistry eccentric, anatomy
     unsystematic, sensational literature and crime records unique,
     violin-player, boxer, swordsman, lawyer, and self-poisoner by cocaine
     and tobacco. Those, I think, were the main points of my analysis."

     Holmes grinned at the last item. "Well," he said, "I say now, as I
     said then, that a man should keep his little brain-attic stocked with
     all the furniture that he is likely to use, and the rest he can put
     away in the lumber-room of his library, where he can get it if he
     wants it. Now, for such a case as the one which has been submitted to
     us to-night, we need certainly to muster all our resources. Kindly
     hand me down the letter K of the 'American Encyclopaedia' which
     stands upon the shelf beside you. Thank you. Now let us consider the
     situation and see what may be deduced from it. In the first place, we
     may start with a strong presumption that Colonel Openshaw had some
     very strong reason for leaving America. Men at his time of life do
     not change all their habits and exchange willingly the charming
     climate of Florida for the lonely life of an English provincial town.
     His extreme love of solitude in England suggests the idea that he was
     in fear of someone or something, so we may assume as a working
     hypothesis that it was fear of someone or something which drove him
     from America. As to what it was he feared, we can only deduce that by
     considering the formidable letters which were received by himself and
     his successors. Did you remark the postmarks of those letters?"

     "The first was from Pondicherry, the second from Dundee, and the
     third from London."

     "From East London. What do you deduce from that?"

     "They are all seaports. That the writer was on board of a ship."

     "Excellent. We have already a clue. There can be no doubt that the
     probability--the strong probability--is that the writer was on board
     of a ship. And now let us consider another point. In the case of
     Pondicherry, seven weeks elapsed between the threat and its
     fulfilment, in Dundee it was only some three or four days. Does that
     suggest anything?"

     "A greater distance to travel."

     "But the letter had also a greater distance to come."

     "Then I do not see the point."

     "There is at least a presumption that the vessel in which the man or
     men are is a sailing-ship. It looks as if they always send their
     singular warning or token before them when starting upon their
     mission. You see how quickly the deed followed the sign when it came
     from Dundee. If they had come from Pondicherry in a steamer they
     would have arrived almost as soon as their letter. But, as a matter
     of fact, seven weeks elapsed. I think that those seven weeks
     represented the difference between the mail-boat which brought the
     letter and the sailing vessel which brought the writer."

     "It is possible."

     "More than that. It is probable. And now you see the deadly urgency
     of this new case, and why I urged young Openshaw to caution. The blow
     has always fallen at the end of the time which it would take the
     senders to travel the distance. But this one comes from London, and
     therefore we cannot count upon delay."

     "Good God!" I cried. "What can it mean, this relentless persecution?"

     "The papers which Openshaw carried are obviously of vital importance
     to the person or persons in the sailing-ship. I think that it is
     quite clear that there must be more than one of them. A single man
     could not have carried out two deaths in such a way as to deceive a
     coroner's jury. There must have been several in it, and they must
     have been men of resource and determination. Their papers they mean
     to have, be the holder of them who it may. In this way you see K. K.
     K. ceases to be the initials of an individual and becomes the badge
     of a society."

     "But of what society?"

     "Have you never--" said Sherlock Holmes, bending forward and sinking
     his voice--"have you never heard of the Ku Klux Klan?"

     "I never have."

     Holmes turned over the leaves of the book upon his knee. "Here it
     is," said he presently:

     "'Ku Klux Klan. A name derived from the fanciful resemblance to the
     sound produced by cocking a rifle. This terrible secret society was
     formed by some ex-Confederate soldiers in the Southern states after
     the Civil War, and it rapidly formed local branches in different
     parts of the country, notably in Tennessee, Louisiana, the Carolinas,
     Georgia, and Florida. Its power was used for political purposes,
     principally for the terrorising of the negro voters and the murdering
     and driving from the country of those who were opposed to its views.
     Its outrages were usually preceded by a warning sent to the marked
     man in some fantastic but generally recognised shape--a sprig of
     oak-leaves in some parts, melon seeds or orange pips in others. On
     receiving this the victim might either openly abjure his former ways,
     or might fly from the country. If he braved the matter out, death
     would unfailingly come upon him, and usually in some strange and
     unforeseen manner. So perfect was the organisation of the society,
     and so systematic its methods, that there is hardly a case upon
     record where any man succeeded in braving it with impunity, or in
     which any of its outrages were traced home to the perpetrators. For
     some years the organisation flourished in spite of the efforts of the
     United States government and of the better classes of the community
     in the South. Eventually, in the year 1869, the movement rather
     suddenly collapsed, although there have been sporadic outbreaks of
     the same sort since that date.'

     "You will observe," said Holmes, laying down the volume, "that the
     sudden breaking up of the society was coincident with the
     disappearance of Openshaw from America with their papers. It may well
     have been cause and effect. It is no wonder that he and his family
     have some of the more implacable spirits upon their track. You can
     understand that this register and diary may implicate some of the
     first men in the South, and that there may be many who will not sleep
     easy at night until it is recovered."

     "Then the page we have seen--"

     "Is such as we might expect. It ran, if I remember right, 'sent the
     pips to A, B, and C'--that is, sent the society's warning to them.
     Then there are successive entries that A and B cleared, or left the
     country, and finally that C was visited, with, I fear, a sinister
     result for C. Well, I think, Doctor, that we may let some light into
     this dark place, and I believe that the only chance young Openshaw
     has in the meantime is to do what I have told him. There is nothing
     more to be said or to be done to-night, so hand me over my violin and
     let us try to forget for half an hour the miserable weather and the
     still more miserable ways of our fellow-men."

     It had cleared in the morning, and the sun was shining with a subdued
     brightness through the dim veil which hangs over the great city.
     Sherlock Holmes was already at breakfast when I came down.

     "You will excuse me for not waiting for you," said he; "I have, I
     foresee, a very busy day before me in looking into this case of young
     Openshaw's."

     "What steps will you take?" I asked.

     "It will very much depend upon the results of my first inquiries. I
     may have to go down to Horsham, after all."

     "You will not go there first?"

     "No, I shall commence with the City. Just ring the bell and the maid
     will bring up your coffee."

     As I waited, I lifted the unopened newspaper from the table and
     glanced my eye over it. It rested upon a heading which sent a chill
     to my heart.

     "Holmes," I cried, "you are too late."

     "Ah!" said he, laying down his cup, "I feared as much. How was it
     done?" He spoke calmly, but I could see that he was deeply moved.

     "My eye caught the name of Openshaw, and the heading 'Tragedy Near
     Waterloo Bridge.' Here is the account:

     "Between nine and ten last night Police-Constable Cook, of the H
     Division, on duty near Waterloo Bridge, heard a cry for help and a
     splash in the water. The night, however, was extremely dark and
     stormy, so that, in spite of the help of several passers-by, it was
     quite impossible to effect a rescue. The alarm, however, was given,
     and, by the aid of the water-police, the body was eventually
     recovered. It proved to be that of a young gentleman whose name, as
     it appears from an envelope which was found in his pocket, was John
     Openshaw, and whose residence is near Horsham. It is conjectured that
     he may have been hurrying down to catch the last train from Waterloo
     Station, and that in his haste and the extreme darkness he missed his
     path and walked over the edge of one of the small landing-places for
     river steamboats. The body exhibited no traces of violence, and there
     can be no doubt that the deceased had been the victim of an
     unfortunate accident, which should have the effect of calling the
     attention of the authorities to the condition of the riverside
     landing-stages."

     We sat in silence for some minutes, Holmes more depressed and shaken
     than I had ever seen him.

     "That hurts my pride, Watson," he said at last. "It is a petty
     feeling, no doubt, but it hurts my pride. It becomes a personal
     matter with me now, and, if God sends me health, I shall set my hand
     upon this gang. That he should come to me for help, and that I should
     send him away to his death--!" He sprang from his chair and paced
     about the room in uncontrollable agitation, with a flush upon his
     sallow cheeks and a nervous clasping and unclasping of his long thin
     hands.

     "They must be cunning devils," he exclaimed at last. "How could they
     have decoyed him down there? The Embankment is not on the direct line
     to the station. The bridge, no doubt, was too crowded, even on such a
     night, for their purpose. Well, Watson, we shall see who will win in
     the long run. I am going out now!"

     "To the police?"

     "No; I shall be my own police. When I have spun the web they may take
     the flies, but not before."

     All day I was engaged in my professional work, and it was late in the
     evening before I returned to Baker Street. Sherlock Holmes had not
     come back yet. It was nearly ten o'clock before he entered, looking
     pale and worn. He walked up to the sideboard, and tearing a piece
     from the loaf he devoured it voraciously, washing it down with a long
     draught of water.

     "You are hungry," I remarked.

     "Starving. It had escaped my memory. I have had nothing since
     breakfast."

     "Nothing?"

     "Not a bite. I had no time to think of it."

     "And how have you succeeded?"

     "Well."

     "You have a clue?"

     "I have them in the hollow of my hand. Young Openshaw shall not long
     remain unavenged. Why, Watson, let us put their own devilish
     trade-mark upon them. It is well thought of!"

     "What do you mean?"

     He took an orange from the cupboard, and tearing it to pieces he
     squeezed out the pips upon the table. Of these he took five and
     thrust them into an envelope. On the inside of the flap he wrote "S.
     H. for J. O." Then he sealed it and addressed it to "Captain James
     Calhoun, Barque Lone Star, Savannah, Georgia."

     "That will await him when he enters port," said he, chuckling. "It
     may give him a sleepless night. He will find it as sure a precursor
     of his fate as Openshaw did before him."

     "And who is this Captain Calhoun?"

     "The leader of the gang. I shall have the others, but he first."

     "How did you trace it, then?"

     He took a large sheet of paper from his pocket, all covered with
     dates and names.

     "I have spent the whole day," said he, "over Lloyd's registers and
     files of the old papers, following the future career of every vessel
     which touched at Pondicherry in January and February in '83. There
     were thirty-six ships of fair tonnage which were reported there
     during those months. Of these, one, the Lone Star, instantly
     attracted my attention, since, although it was reported as having
     cleared from London, the name is that which is given to one of the
     states of the Union."

     "Texas, I think."

     "I was not and am not sure which; but I knew that the ship must have
     an American origin."

     "What then?"

     "I searched the Dundee records, and when I found that the barque Lone
     Star was there in January, '85, my suspicion became a certainty. I
     then inquired as to the vessels which lay at present in the port of
     London."

     "Yes?"

     "The Lone Star had arrived here last week. I went down to the Albert
     Dock and found that she had been taken down the river by the early
     tide this morning, homeward bound to Savannah. I wired to Gravesend
     and learned that she had passed some time ago, and as the wind is
     easterly I have no doubt that she is now past the Goodwins and not
     very far from the Isle of Wight."

     "What will you do, then?"

     "Oh, I have my hand upon him. He and the two mates, are as I learn,
     the only native-born Americans in the ship. The others are Finns and
     Germans. I know, also, that they were all three away from the ship
     last night. I had it from the stevedore who has been loading their
     cargo. By the time that their sailing-ship reaches Savannah the
     mail-boat will have carried this letter, and the cable will have
     informed the police of Savannah that these three gentlemen are badly
     wanted here upon a charge of murder."

     There is ever a flaw, however, in the best laid of human plans, and
     the murderers of John Openshaw were never to receive the orange pips
     which would show them that another, as cunning and as resolute as
     themselves, was upon their track. Very long and very severe were the
     equinoctial gales that year. We waited long for news of the Lone Star
     of Savannah, but none ever reached us. We did at last hear that
     somewhere far out in the Atlantic a shattered stern-post of a boat
     was seen swinging in the trough of a wave, with the letters "L. S."
     carved upon it, and that is all which we shall ever know of the fate
     of the Lone Star.






                          THE MAN WITH THE TWISTED LIP

     Isa Whitney, brother of the late Elias Whitney, D.D., Principal of
     the Theological College of St. George's, was much addicted to opium.
     The habit grew upon him, as I understand, from some foolish freak
     when he was at college; for having read De Quincey's description of
     his dreams and sensations, he had drenched his tobacco with laudanum
     in an attempt to produce the same effects. He found, as so many more
     have done, that the practice is easier to attain than to get rid of,
     and for many years he continued to be a slave to the drug, an object
     of mingled horror and pity to his friends and relatives. I can see
     him now, with yellow, pasty face, drooping lids, and pin-point
     pupils, all huddled in a chair, the wreck and ruin of a noble man.

     One night--it was in June, '89--there came a ring to my bell, about
     the hour when a man gives his first yawn and glances at the clock. I
     sat up in my chair, and my wife laid her needle-work down in her lap
     and made a little face of disappointment.

     "A patient!" said she. "You'll have to go out."

     I groaned, for I was newly come back from a weary day.

     We heard the door open, a few hurried words, and then quick steps
     upon the linoleum. Our own door flew open, and a lady, clad in some
     dark-coloured stuff, with a black veil, entered the room.

     "You will excuse my calling so late," she began, and then, suddenly
     losing her self-control, she ran forward, threw her arms about my
     wife's neck, and sobbed upon her shoulder. "Oh, I'm in such trouble!"
     she cried; "I do so want a little help."

     "Why," said my wife, pulling up her veil, "it is Kate Whitney.  How
     you startled me, Kate! I had not an idea who you were when you came
     in."

     "I didn't know what to do, so I came straight to you." That was
     always the way. Folk who were in grief came to my wife like birds to
     a light-house.

     "It was very sweet of you to come. Now, you must have some wine and
     water, and sit here comfortably and tell us all about it. Or should
     you rather that I sent James off to bed?"

     "Oh, no, no! I want the doctor's advice and help, too. It's about
     Isa. He has not been home for two days. I am so frightened about
     him!"

     It was not the first time that she had spoken to us of her husband's
     trouble, to me as a doctor, to my wife as an old friend and school
     companion. We soothed and comforted her by such words as we could
     find. Did she know where her husband was? Was it possible that we
     could bring him back to her?

     It seems that it was. She had the surest information that of late he
     had, when the fit was on him, made use of an opium den in the
     farthest east of the City. Hitherto his orgies had always been
     confined to one day, and he had come back, twitching and shattered,
     in the evening. But now the spell had been upon him eight-and-forty
     hours, and he lay there, doubtless among the dregs of the docks,
     breathing in the poison or sleeping off the effects. There he was to
     be found, she was sure of it, at the Bar of Gold, in Upper Swandam
     Lane. But what was she to do? How could she, a young and timid woman,
     make her way into such a place and pluck her husband out from among
     the ruffians who surrounded him?

     There was the case, and of course there was but one way out of it.
     Might I not escort her to this place? And then, as a second thought,
     why should she come at all? I was Isa Whitney's medical adviser, and
     as such I had influence over him. I could manage it better if I were
     alone. I promised her on my word that I would send him home in a cab
     within two hours if he were indeed at the address which she had given
     me. And so in ten minutes I had left my armchair and cheery
     sitting-room behind me, and was speeding eastward in a hansom on a
     strange errand, as it seemed to me at the time, though the future
     only could show how strange it was to be.

     But there was no great difficulty in the first stage of my adventure.
     Upper Swandam Lane is a vile alley lurking behind the high wharves
     which line the north side of the river to the east of London Bridge.
     Between a slop-shop and a gin-shop, approached by a steep flight of
     steps leading down to a black gap like the mouth of a cave, I found
     the den of which I was in search. Ordering my cab to wait, I passed
     down the steps, worn hollow in the centre by the ceaseless tread of
     drunken feet; and by the light of a flickering oil-lamp above the
     door I found the latch and made my way into a long, low room, thick
     and heavy with the brown opium smoke, and terraced with wooden
     berths, like the forecastle of an emigrant ship.

     Through the gloom one could dimly catch a glimpse of bodies lying in
     strange fantastic poses, bowed shoulders, bent knees, heads thrown
     back, and chins pointing upward, with here and there a dark,
     lack-lustre eye turned upon the newcomer. Out of the black shadows
     there glimmered little red circles of light, now bright, now faint,
     as the burning poison waxed or waned in the bowls of the metal pipes.
     The most lay silent, but some muttered to themselves, and others
     talked together in a strange, low, monotonous voice, their
     conversation coming in gushes, and then suddenly tailing off into
     silence, each mumbling out his own thoughts and paying little heed to
     the words of his neighbour. At the farther end was a small brazier of
     burning charcoal, beside which on a three-legged wooden stool there
     sat a tall, thin old man, with his jaw resting upon his two fists,
     and his elbows upon his knees, staring into the fire.

     As I entered, a sallow Malay attendant had hurried up with a pipe for
     me and a supply of the drug, beckoning me to an empty berth.

     "Thank you. I have not come to stay," said I. "There is a friend of
     mine here, Mr. Isa Whitney, and I wish to speak with him."

     There was a movement and an exclamation from my right, and peering
     through the gloom, I saw Whitney, pale, haggard, and unkempt, staring
     out at me.

     "My God! It's Watson," said he. He was in a pitiable state of
     reaction, with every nerve in a twitter. "I say, Watson, what o'clock
     is it?"

     "Nearly eleven."

     "Of what day?"

     "Of Friday, June 19th."

     "Good heavens! I thought it was Wednesday. It is Wednesday. What
     d'you want to frighten a chap for?" He sank his face onto his arms
     and began to sob in a high treble key.

     "I tell you that it is Friday, man. Your wife has been waiting this
     two days for you. You should be ashamed of yourself!"

     "So I am. But you've got mixed, Watson, for I have only been here a
     few hours, three pipes, four pipes--I forget how many. But I'll go
     home with you. I wouldn't frighten Kate--poor little Kate. Give me
     your hand! Have you a cab?"

     "Yes, I have one waiting."

     "Then I shall go in it. But I must owe something. Find what I owe,
     Watson. I am all off colour. I can do nothing for myself."

     I walked down the narrow passage between the double row of sleepers,
     holding my breath to keep out the vile, stupefying fumes of the drug,
     and looking about for the manager. As I passed the tall man who sat
     by the brazier I felt a sudden pluck at my skirt, and a low voice
     whispered, "Walk past me, and then look back at me." The words fell
     quite distinctly upon my ear. I glanced down. They could only have
     come from the old man at my side, and yet he sat now as absorbed as
     ever, very thin, very wrinkled, bent with age, an opium pipe dangling
     down from between his knees, as though it had dropped in sheer
     lassitude from his fingers. I took two steps forward and looked back.
     It took all my self-control to prevent me from breaking out into a
     cry of astonishment. He had turned his back so that none could see
     him but I. His form had filled out, his wrinkles were gone, the dull
     eyes had regained their fire, and there, sitting by the fire and
     grinning at my surprise, was none other than Sherlock Holmes. He made
     a slight motion to me to approach him, and instantly, as he turned
     his face half round to the company once more, subsided into a
     doddering, loose-lipped senility.

     "Holmes!" I whispered, "what on earth are you doing in this den?"

     "As low as you can," he answered; "I have excellent ears. If you
     would have the great kindness to get rid of that sottish friend of
     yours I should be exceedingly glad to have a little talk with you."

     "I have a cab outside."

     "Then pray send him home in it. You may safely trust him, for he
     appears to be too limp to get into any mischief. I should recommend
     you also to send a note by the cabman to your wife to say that you
     have thrown in your lot with me. If you will wait outside, I shall be
     with you in five minutes."

           It was difficult to refuse any of Sherlock Holmes' requests,
     for they were always so exceedingly definite, and put forward with
     such a quiet air of mastery. I felt, however, that when Whitney was
     once confined in the cab my mission was practically accomplished; and
     for the rest, I could not wish anything better than to be associated
     with my friend in one of those singular adventures which were the
     normal condition of his existence. In a few minutes I had written my
     note, paid Whitney's bill, led him out to the cab, and seen him
     driven through the darkness. In a very short time a decrepit figure
     had emerged from the opium den, and I was walking down the street
     with Sherlock Holmes. For two streets he shuffled along with a bent
     back and an uncertain foot. Then, glancing quickly round, he
     straightened himself out and burst into a hearty fit of laughter.

     "I suppose, Watson," said he, "that you imagine that I have added
     opium-smoking to cocaine injections, and all the other little
     weaknesses on which you have favoured me with your medical views."

     "I was certainly surprised to find you there."

     "But not more so than I to find you."

     "I came to find a friend."

     "And I to find an enemy."

     "An enemy?"

     "Yes; one of my natural enemies, or, shall I say, my natural prey.
     Briefly, Watson, I am in the midst of a very remarkable inquiry, and
     I have hoped to find a clue in the incoherent ramblings of these
     sots, as I have done before now. Had I been recognised in that den my
     life would not have been worth an hour's purchase; for I have used it
     before now for my own purposes, and the rascally Lascar who runs it
     has sworn to have vengeance upon me. There is a trap-door at the back
     of that building, near the corner of Paul's Wharf, which could tell
     some strange tales of what has passed through it upon the moonless
     nights."

     "What! You do not mean bodies?"

     "Ay, bodies, Watson. We should be rich men if we had ?000 for every
     poor devil who has been done to death in that den. It is the vilest
     murder-trap on the whole riverside, and I fear that Neville St. Clair
     has entered it never to leave it more. But our trap should be here."
     He put his two forefingers between his teeth and whistled shrilly--a
     signal which was answered by a similar whistle from the distance,
     followed shortly by the rattle of wheels and the clink of horses'
     hoofs.

     "Now, Watson," said Holmes, as a tall dog-cart dashed up through the
     gloom, throwing out two golden tunnels of yellow light from its side
     lanterns. "You'll come with me, won't you?"

     "If I can be of use."

     "Oh, a trusty comrade is always of use; and a chronicler still more
     so. My room at The Cedars is a double-bedded one."

     "The Cedars?"

     "Yes; that is Mr. St. Clair's house. I am staying there while I
     conduct the inquiry."

     "Where is it, then?"

     "Near Lee, in Kent. We have a seven-mile drive before us."

     "But I am all in the dark."

     "Of course you are. You'll know all about it presently. Jump up here.
     All right, John; we shall not need you. Here's half a crown. Look out
     for me to-morrow, about eleven. Give her her head. So long, then!"

     He flicked the horse with his whip, and we dashed away through the
     endless succession of sombre and deserted streets, which widened
     gradually, until we were flying across a broad balustraded bridge,
     with the murky river flowing sluggishly beneath us. Beyond lay
     another dull wilderness of bricks and mortar, its silence broken only
     by the heavy, regular footfall of the policeman, or the songs and
     shouts of some belated party of revellers. A dull wrack was drifting
     slowly across the sky, and a star or two twinkled dimly here and
     there through the rifts of the clouds. Holmes drove in silence, with
     his head sunk upon his breast, and the air of a man who is lost in
     thought, while I sat beside him, curious to learn what this new quest
     might be which seemed to tax his powers so sorely, and yet afraid to
     break in upon the current of his thoughts. We had driven several
     miles, and were beginning to get to the fringe of the belt of
     suburban villas, when he shook himself, shrugged his shoulders, and
     lit up his pipe with the air of a man who has satisfied himself that
     he is acting for the best.

     "You have a grand gift of silence, Watson," said he. "It makes you
     quite invaluable as a companion. 'Pon my word, it is a great thing
     for me to have someone to talk to, for my own thoughts are not
     over-pleasant. I was wondering what I should say to this dear little
     woman to-night when she meets me at the door."

     "You forget that I know nothing about it."

     "I shall just have time to tell you the facts of the case before we
     get to Lee. It seems absurdly simple, and yet, somehow I can get
     nothing to go upon. There's plenty of thread, no doubt, but I can't
     get the end of it into my hand. Now, I'll state the case clearly and
     concisely to you, Watson, and maybe you can see a spark where all is
     dark to me."

     "Proceed, then."

     "Some years ago--to be definite, in May, 1884--there came to Lee a
     gentleman, Neville St. Clair by name, who appeared to have plenty of
     money. He took a large villa, laid out the grounds very nicely, and
     lived generally in good style. By degrees he made friends in the
     neighbourhood, and in 1887 he married the daughter of a local brewer,
     by whom he now has two children. He had no occupation, but was
     interested in several companies and went into town as a rule in the
     morning, returning by the 5.14 from Cannon Street every night. Mr.
     St. Clair is now thirty-seven years of age, is a man of temperate
     habits, a good husband, a very affectionate father, and a man who is
     popular with all who know him. I may add that his whole debts at the
     present moment, as far as we have been able to ascertain, amount to
     ?8 10s., while he has ?20 standing to his credit in the Capital and
     Counties Bank. There is no reason, therefore, to think that money
     troubles have been weighing upon his mind.

     "Last Monday Mr. Neville St. Clair went into town rather earlier than
     usual, remarking before he started that he had two important
     commissions to perform, and that he would bring his little boy home a
     box of bricks. Now, by the merest chance, his wife received a
     telegram upon this same Monday, very shortly after his departure, to
     the effect that a small parcel of considerable value which she had
     been expecting was waiting for her at the offices of the Aberdeen
     Shipping Company. Now, if you are well up in your London, you will
     know that the office of the company is in Fresno Street, which
     branches out of Upper Swandam Lane, where you found me to-night. Mrs.
     St. Clair had her lunch, started for the City, did some shopping,
     proceeded to the company's office, got her packet, and found herself
     at exactly 4.35 walking through Swandam Lane on her way back to the
     station. Have you followed me so far?"

     "It is very clear."

     "If you remember, Monday was an exceedingly hot day, and Mrs. St.
     Clair walked slowly, glancing about in the hope of seeing a cab, as
     she did not like the neighbourhood in which she found herself. While
     she was walking in this way down Swandam Lane, she suddenly heard an
     ejaculation or cry, and was struck cold to see her husband looking
     down at her and, as it seemed to her, beckoning to her from a
     second-floor window. The window was open, and she distinctly saw his
     face, which she describes as being terribly agitated. He waved his
     hands frantically to her, and then vanished from the window so
     suddenly that it seemed to her that he had been plucked back by some
     irresistible force from behind. One singular point which struck her
     quick feminine eye was that although he wore some dark coat, such as
     he had started to town in, he had on neither collar nor necktie.

     "Convinced that something was amiss with him, she rushed down the
     steps--for the house was none other than the opium den in which you
     found me to-night--and running through the front room she attempted
     to ascend the stairs which led to the first floor. At the foot of the
     stairs, however, she met this Lascar scoundrel of whom I have spoken,
     who thrust her back and, aided by a Dane, who acts as assistant
     there, pushed her out into the street. Filled with the most maddening
     doubts and fears, she rushed down the lane and, by rare good-fortune,
     met in Fresno Street a number of constables with an inspector, all on
     their way to their beat. The inspector and two men accompanied her
     back, and in spite of the continued resistance of the proprietor,
     they made their way to the room in which Mr. St. Clair had last been
     seen. There was no sign of him there. In fact, in the whole of that
     floor there was no one to be found save a crippled wretch of hideous
     aspect, who, it seems, made his home there. Both he and the Lascar
     stoutly swore that no one else had been in the front room during the
     afternoon. So determined was their denial that the inspector was
     staggered, and had almost come to believe that Mrs. St. Clair had
     been deluded when, with a cry, she sprang at a small deal box which
     lay upon the table and tore the lid from it. Out there fell a cascade
     of children's bricks. It was the toy which he had promised to bring
     home.

     "This discovery, and the evident confusion which the cripple showed,
     made the inspector realise that the matter was serious. The rooms
     were carefully examined, and results all pointed to an abominable
     crime. The front room was plainly furnished as a sitting-room and led
     into a small bedroom, which looked out upon the back of one of the
     wharves. Between the wharf and the bedroom window is a narrow strip,
     which is dry at low tide but is covered at high tide with at least
     four and a half feet of water. The bedroom window was a broad one and
     opened from below. On examination traces of blood were to be seen
     upon the windowsill, and several scattered drops were visible upon
     the wooden floor of the bedroom. Thrust away behind a curtain in the
     front room were all the clothes of Mr. Neville St. Clair, with the
     exception of his coat. His boots, his socks, his hat, and his
     watch--all were there. There were no signs of violence upon any of
     these garments, and there were no other traces of Mr. Neville St.
     Clair. Out of the window he must apparently have gone for no other
     exit could be discovered, and the ominous bloodstains upon the sill
     gave little promise that he could save himself by swimming, for the
     tide was at its very highest at the moment of the tragedy.

     "And now as to the villains who seemed to be immediately implicated
     in the matter. The Lascar was known to be a man of the vilest
     antecedents, but as, by Mrs. St. Clair's story, he was known to have
     been at the foot of the stair within a very few seconds of her
     husband's appearance at the window, he could hardly have been more
     than an accessory to the crime. His defence was one of absolute
     ignorance, and he protested that he had no knowledge as to the doings
     of Hugh Boone, his lodger, and that he could not account in any way
     for the presence of the missing gentleman's clothes.

     "So much for the Lascar manager. Now for the sinister cripple who
     lives upon the second floor of the opium den, and who was certainly
     the last human being whose eyes rested upon Neville St. Clair. His
     name is Hugh Boone, and his hideous face is one which is familiar to
     every man who goes much to the City. He is a professional beggar,
     though in order to avoid the police regulations he pretends to a
     small trade in wax vestas. Some little distance down Threadneedle
     Street, upon the left-hand side, there is, as you may have remarked,
     a small angle in the wall. Here it is that this creature takes his
     daily seat, cross-legged with his tiny stock of matches on his lap,
     and as he is a piteous spectacle a small rain of charity descends
     into the greasy leather cap which lies upon the pavement beside him.
     I have watched the fellow more than once before ever I thought of
     making his professional acquaintance, and I have been surprised at
     the harvest which he has reaped in a short time. His appearance, you
     see, is so remarkable that no one can pass him without observing him.
     A shock of orange hair, a pale face disfigured by a horrible scar,
     which, by its contraction, has turned up the outer edge of his upper
     lip, a bulldog chin, and a pair of very penetrating dark eyes, which
     present a singular contrast to the colour of his hair, all mark him
     out from amid the common crowd of mendicants and so, too, does his
     wit, for he is ever ready with a reply to any piece of chaff which
     may be thrown at him by the passers-by. This is the man whom we now
     learn to have been the lodger at the opium den, and to have been the
     last man to see the gentleman of whom we are in quest."

     "But a cripple!" said I. "What could he have done single-handed
     against a man in the prime of life?"

     "He is a cripple in the sense that he walks with a limp; but in other
     respects he appears to be a powerful and well-nurtured man. Surely
     your medical experience would tell you, Watson, that weakness in one
     limb is often compensated for by exceptional strength in the others."

     "Pray continue your narrative."

     "Mrs. St. Clair had fainted at the sight of the blood upon the
     window, and she was escorted home in a cab by the police, as her
     presence could be of no help to them in their investigations.
     Inspector Barton, who had charge of the case, made a very careful
     examination of the premises, but without finding anything which threw
     any light upon the matter. One mistake had been made in not arresting
     Boone instantly, as he was allowed some few minutes during which he
     might have communicated with his friend the Lascar, but this fault
     was soon remedied, and he was seized and searched, without anything
     being found which could incriminate him. There were, it is true, some
     blood-stains upon his right shirt-sleeve, but he pointed to his
     ring-finger, which had been cut near the nail, and explained that the
     bleeding came from there, adding that he had been to the window not
     long before, and that the stains which had been observed there came
     doubtless from the same source. He denied strenuously having ever
     seen Mr. Neville St. Clair and swore that the presence of the clothes
     in his room was as much a mystery to him as to the police. As to Mrs.
     St. Clair's assertion that she had actually seen her husband at the
     window, he declared that she must have been either mad or dreaming.
     He was removed, loudly protesting, to the police-station, while the
     inspector remained upon the premises in the hope that the ebbing tide
     might afford some fresh clue.

     "And it did, though they hardly found upon the mud-bank what they had
     feared to find. It was Neville St. Clair's coat, and not Neville St.
     Clair, which lay uncovered as the tide receded. And what do you think
     they found in the pockets?"

     "I cannot imagine."

     "No, I don't think you would guess. Every pocket stuffed with pennies
     and half-pennies--421 pennies and 270 half-pennies. It was no wonder
     that it had not been swept away by the tide. But a human body is a
     different matter. There is a fierce eddy between the wharf and the
     house. It seemed likely enough that the weighted coat had remained
     when the stripped body had been sucked away into the river."

     "But I understand that all the other clothes were found in the room.
     Would the body be dressed in a coat alone?"

     "No, sir, but the facts might be met speciously enough. Suppose that
     this man Boone had thrust Neville St. Clair through the window, there
     is no human eye which could have seen the deed. What would he do
     then? It would of course instantly strike him that he must get rid of
     the tell-tale garments. He would seize the coat, then, and be in the
     act of throwing it out, when it would occur to him that it would swim
     and not sink. He has little time, for he has heard the scuffle
     downstairs when the wife tried to force her way up, and perhaps he
     has already heard from his Lascar confederate that the police are
     hurrying up the street. There is not an instant to be lost. He rushes
     to some secret hoard, where he has accumulated the fruits of his
     beggary, and he stuffs all the coins upon which he can lay his hands
     into the pockets to make sure of the coat's sinking. He throws it
     out, and would have done the same with the other garments had not he
     heard the rush of steps below, and only just had time to close the
     window when the police appeared."

     "It certainly sounds feasible."

     "Well, we will take it as a working hypothesis for want of a better.
     Boone, as I have told you, was arrested and taken to the station, but
     it could not be shown that there had ever before been anything
     against him. He had for years been known as a professional beggar,
     but his life appeared to have been a very quiet and innocent one.
     There the matter stands at present, and the questions which have to
     be solved--what Neville St. Clair was doing in the opium den, what
     happened to him when there, where is he now, and what Hugh Boone had
     to do with his disappearance--are all as far from a solution as ever.
     I confess that I cannot recall any case within my experience which
     looked at the first glance so simple and yet which presented such
     difficulties."

     While Sherlock Holmes had been detailing this singular series of
     events, we had been whirling through the outskirts of the great town
     until the last straggling houses had been left behind, and we rattled
     along with a country hedge upon either side of us. Just as he
     finished, however, we drove through two scattered villages, where a
     few lights still glimmered in the windows.

     "We are on the outskirts of Lee," said my companion. "We have touched
     on three English counties in our short drive, starting in Middlesex,
     passing over an angle of Surrey, and ending in Kent. See that light
     among the trees? That is The Cedars, and beside that lamp sits a
     woman whose anxious ears have already, I have little doubt, caught
     the clink of our horse's feet."

     "But why are you not conducting the case from Baker Street?" I asked.

     "Because there are many inquiries which must be made out here. Mrs.
     St. Clair has most kindly put two rooms at my disposal, and you may
     rest assured that she will have nothing but a welcome for my friend
     and colleague. I hate to meet her, Watson, when I have no news of her
     husband. Here we are. Whoa, there, whoa!"

     We had pulled up in front of a large villa which stood within its own
     grounds. A stable-boy had run out to the horse's head, and springing
     down, I followed Holmes up the small, winding gravel-drive which led
     to the house. As we approached, the door flew open, and a little
     blonde woman stood in the opening, clad in some sort of light
     mousseline de soie, with a touch of fluffy pink chiffon at her neck
     and wrists. She stood with her figure outlined against the flood of
     light, one hand upon the door, one half-raised in her eagerness, her
     body slightly bent, her head and face protruded, with eager eyes and
     parted lips, a standing question.

     "Well?" she cried, "well?" And then, seeing that there were two of
     us, she gave a cry of hope which sank into a groan as she saw that my
     companion shook his head and shrugged his shoulders.

     "No good news?"

     "None."

     "No bad?"

     "No."

     "Thank God for that. But come in. You must be weary, for you have had
     a long day."

     "This is my friend, Dr. Watson. He has been of most vital use to me
     in several of my cases, and a lucky chance has made it possible for
     me to bring him out and associate him with this investigation."

     "I am delighted to see you," said she, pressing my hand warmly. "You
     will, I am sure, forgive anything that may be wanting in our
     arrangements, when you consider the blow which has come so suddenly
     upon us."

     "My dear madam," said I, "I am an old campaigner, and if I were not I
     can very well see that no apology is needed. If I can be of any
     assistance, either to you or to my friend here, I shall be indeed
     happy."

     "Now, Mr. Sherlock Holmes," said the lady as we entered a well-lit
     dining-room, upon the table of which a cold supper had been laid out,
     "I should very much like to ask you one or two plain questions, to
     which I beg that you will give a plain answer."

     "Certainly, madam."

     "Do not trouble about my feelings. I am not hysterical, nor given to
     fainting. I simply wish to hear your real, real opinion."

     "Upon what point?"

     "In your heart of hearts, do you think that Neville is alive?"

     Sherlock Holmes seemed to be embarrassed by the question. "Frankly,
     now!" she repeated, standing upon the rug and looking keenly down at
     him as he leaned back in a basket-chair.

     "Frankly, then, madam, I do not."

     "You think that he is dead?"

     "I do."

     "Murdered?"

     "I don't say that. Perhaps."

     "And on what day did he meet his death?"

     "On Monday."

     "Then perhaps, Mr. Holmes, you will be good enough to explain how it
     is that I have received a letter from him to-day."

     Sherlock Holmes sprang out of his chair as if he had been galvanised.

     "What!" he roared.

     "Yes, to-day." She stood smiling, holding up a little slip of paper
     in the air.

     "May I see it?"

     "Certainly."

     He snatched it from her in his eagerness, and smoothing it out upon
     the table he drew over the lamp and examined it intently. I had left
     my chair and was gazing at it over his shoulder. The envelope was a
     very coarse one and was stamped with the Gravesend postmark and with
     the date of that very day, or rather of the day before, for it was
     considerably after midnight.

     "Coarse writing," murmured Holmes. "Surely this is not your husband's
     writing, madam."

     "No, but the enclosure is."

     "I perceive also that whoever addressed the envelope had to go and
     inquire as to the address."

     "How can you tell that?"

     "The name, you see, is in perfectly black ink, which has dried
     itself. The rest is of the greyish colour, which shows that
     blotting-paper has been used. If it had been written straight off,
     and then blotted, none would be of a deep black shade. This man has
     written the name, and there has then been a pause before he wrote the
     address, which can only mean that he was not familiar with it. It is,
     of course, a trifle, but there is nothing so important as trifles.
     Let us now see the letter. Ha!  there has been an enclosure here!"

     "Yes, there was a ring. His signet-ring."

     "And you are sure that this is your husband's hand?"

     "One of his hands."

     "One?"

     "His hand when he wrote hurriedly. It is very unlike his usual
     writing, and yet I know it well."

     "Dearest do not be frightened. All will come well. There is a huge
     error which it may take some little time to rectify. Wait in
     patience.
     "Neville.

     Written in pencil upon the fly-leaf of a book, octavo size, no
     water-mark. Hum! Posted to-day in Gravesend by a man with a dirty
     thumb. Ha! And the flap has been gummed, if I am not very much in
     error, by a person who had been chewing tobacco. And you have no
     doubt that it is your husband's hand, madam?"

     "None. Neville wrote those words."

     "And they were posted to-day at Gravesend. Well, Mrs. St. Clair, the
     clouds lighten, though I should not venture to say that the danger is
     over."

     "But he must be alive, Mr. Holmes."

     "Unless this is a clever forgery to put us on the wrong scent. The
     ring, after all, proves nothing. It may have been taken from him."

     "No, no; it is, it is his very own writing!"

     "Very well. It may, however, have been written on Monday and only
     posted to-day."

     "That is possible."

     "If so, much may have happened between."

     "Oh, you must not discourage me, Mr. Holmes. I know that all is well
     with him. There is so keen a sympathy between us that I should know
     if evil came upon him. On the very day that I saw him last he cut
     himself in the bedroom, and yet I in the dining-room rushed upstairs
     instantly with the utmost certainty that something had happened. Do
     you think that I would respond to such a trifle and yet be ignorant
     of his death?"

     "I have seen too much not to know that the impression of a woman may
     be more valuable than the conclusion of an analytical reasoner. And
     in this letter you certainly have a very strong piece of evidence to
     corroborate your view. But if your husband is alive and able to write
     letters, why should he remain away from you?"

     "I cannot imagine. It is unthinkable."

     "And on Monday he made no remarks before leaving you?"

     "No."

     "And you were surprised to see him in Swandam Lane?"

     "Very much so."

     "Was the window open?"

     "Yes."

     "Then he might have called to you?"

     "He might."

     "He only, as I understand, gave an inarticulate cry?"

     "Yes."

     "A call for help, you thought?"

     "Yes. He waved his hands."

     "But it might have been a cry of surprise. Astonishment at the
     unexpected sight of you might cause him to throw up his hands?"

     "It is possible."

     "And you thought he was pulled back?"

     "He disappeared so suddenly."

     "He might have leaped back. You did not see anyone else in the room?"

     "No, but this horrible man confessed to having been there, and the
     Lascar was at the foot of the stairs."

     "Quite so. Your husband, as far as you could see, had his ordinary
     clothes on?"

     "But without his collar or tie. I distinctly saw his bare throat."

     "Had he ever spoken of Swandam Lane?"

     "Never."

     "Had he ever showed any signs of having taken opium?"

     "Never."

     "Thank you, Mrs. St. Clair. Those are the principal points about
     which I wished to be absolutely clear. We shall now have a little
     supper and then retire, for we may have a very busy day to-morrow."

     A large and comfortable double-bedded room had been placed at our
     disposal, and I was quickly between the sheets, for I was weary after
     my night of adventure. Sherlock Holmes was a man, however, who, when
     he had an unsolved problem upon his mind, would go for days, and even
     for a week, without rest, turning it over, rearranging his facts,
     looking at it from every point of view until he had either fathomed
     it or convinced himself that his data were insufficient. It was soon
     evident to me that he was now preparing for an all-night sitting. He
     took off his coat and waistcoat, put on a large blue dressing-gown,
     and then wandered about the room collecting pillows from his bed and
     cushions from the sofa and armchairs. With these he constructed a
     sort of Eastern divan, upon which he perched himself cross-legged,
     with an ounce of shag tobacco and a box of matches laid out in front
     of him. In the dim light of the lamp I saw him sitting there, an old
     briar pipe between his lips, his eyes fixed vacantly upon the corner
     of the ceiling, the blue smoke curling up from him, silent,
     motionless, with the light shining upon his strong-set aquiline
     features. So he sat as I dropped off to sleep, and so he sat when a
     sudden ejaculation caused me to wake up, and I found the summer sun
     shining into the apartment. The pipe was still between his lips, the
     smoke still curled upward, and the room was full of a dense tobacco
     haze, but nothing remained of the heap of shag which I had seen upon
     the previous night.

     "Awake, Watson?" he asked.

     "Yes."

     "Game for a morning drive?"

     "Certainly."

     "Then dress. No one is stirring yet, but I know where the stable-boy
     sleeps, and we shall soon have the trap out." He chuckled to himself
     as he spoke, his eyes twinkled, and he seemed a different man to the
     sombre thinker of the previous night.

     As I dressed I glanced at my watch. It was no wonder that no one was
     stirring. It was twenty-five minutes past four. I had hardly finished
     when Holmes returned with the news that the boy was putting in the
     horse.

     "I want to test a little theory of mine," said he, pulling on his
     boots. "I think, Watson, that you are now standing in the presence of
     one of the most absolute fools in Europe. I deserve to be kicked from
     here to Charing Cross. But I think I have the key of the affair now."

     "And where is it?" I asked, smiling.

     "In the bathroom," he answered. "Oh, yes, I am not joking," he
     continued, seeing my look of incredulity. "I have just been there,
     and I have taken it out, and I have got it in this Gladstone bag.
     Come on, my boy, and we shall see whether it will not fit the lock."

     We made our way downstairs as quietly as possible, and out into the
     bright morning sunshine. In the road stood our horse and trap, with
     the half-clad stable-boy waiting at the head. We both sprang in, and
     away we dashed down the London Road. A few country carts were
     stirring, bearing in vegetables to the metropolis, but the lines of
     villas on either side were as silent and lifeless as some city in a
     dream.

     "It has been in some points a singular case," said Holmes, flicking
     the horse on into a gallop. "I confess that I have been as blind as a
     mole, but it is better to learn wisdom late than never to learn it at
     all."

     In town the earliest risers were just beginning to look sleepily from
     their windows as we drove through the streets of the Surrey side.
     Passing down the Waterloo Bridge Road we crossed over the river, and
     dashing up Wellington Street wheeled sharply to the right and found
     ourselves in Bow Street. Sherlock Holmes was well known to the force,
     and the two constables at the door saluted him. One of them held the
     horse's head while the other led us in.

     "Who is on duty?" asked Holmes.

     "Inspector Bradstreet, sir."

     "Ah, Bradstreet, how are you?" A tall, stout official had come down
     the stone-flagged passage, in a peaked cap and frogged jacket. "I
     wish to have a quiet word with you, Bradstreet." "Certainly, Mr.
     Holmes. Step into my room here." It was a small, office-like room,
     with a huge ledger upon the table, and a telephone projecting from
     the wall. The inspector sat down at his desk.

     "What can I do for you, Mr. Holmes?"

     "I called about that beggarman, Boone--the one who was charged with
     being concerned in the disappearance of Mr. Neville St. Clair, of
     Lee."

     "Yes. He was brought up and remanded for further inquiries."

     "So I heard. You have him here?"

     "In the cells."

     "Is he quiet?"

     "Oh, he gives no trouble. But he is a dirty scoundrel."

     "Dirty?"

     "Yes, it is all we can do to make him wash his hands, and his face is
     as black as a tinker's. Well, when once his case has been settled, he
     will have a regular prison bath; and I think, if you saw him, you
     would agree with me that he needed it."

     "I should like to see him very much."

     "Would you? That is easily done. Come this way. You can leave your
     bag."

     "No, I think that I'll take it."

     "Very good. Come this way, if you please." He led us down a passage,
     opened a barred door, passed down a winding stair, and brought us to
     a whitewashed corridor with a line of doors on each side.

     "The third on the right is his," said the inspector. "Here it is!" He
     quietly shot back a panel in the upper part of the door and glanced
     through.

     "He is asleep," said he. "You can see him very well."

     We both put our eyes to the grating. The prisoner lay with his face
     towards us, in a very deep sleep, breathing slowly and heavily. He
     was a middle-sized man, coarsely clad as became his calling, with a
     coloured shirt protruding through the rent in his tattered coat. He
     was, as the inspector had said, extremely dirty, but the grime which
     covered his face could not conceal its repulsive ugliness. A broad
     wheal from an old scar ran right across it from eye to chin, and by
     its contraction had turned up one side of the upper lip, so that
     three teeth were exposed in a perpetual snarl. A shock of very bright
     red hair grew low over his eyes and forehead.

     "He's a beauty, isn't he?" said the inspector.

     "He certainly needs a wash," remarked Holmes. "I had an idea that he
     might, and I took the liberty of bringing the tools with me." He
     opened the Gladstone bag as he spoke, and took out, to my
     astonishment, a very large bath-sponge.

     "He! he! You are a funny one," chuckled the inspector.

     "Now, if you will have the great goodness to open that door very
     quietly, we will soon make him cut a much more respectable figure."

     "Well, I don't know why not," said the inspector. "He doesn't look a
     credit to the Bow Street cells, does he?" He slipped his key into the
     lock, and we all very quietly entered the cell. The sleeper half
     turned, and then settled down once more into a deep slumber. Holmes
     stooped to the water-jug, moistened his sponge, and then rubbed it
     twice vigorously across and down the prisoner's face.

     "Let me introduce you," he shouted, "to Mr. Neville St. Clair, of
     Lee, in the county of Kent."

     Never in my life have I seen such a sight. The man's face peeled off
     under the sponge like the bark from a tree. Gone was the coarse brown
     tint! Gone, too, was the horrid scar which had seamed it across, and
     the twisted lip which had given the repulsive sneer to the face! A
     twitch brought away the tangled red hair, and there, sitting up in
     his bed, was a pale, sad-faced, refined-looking man, black-haired and
     smooth-skinned, rubbing his eyes and staring about him with sleepy
     bewilderment. Then suddenly realising the exposure, he broke into a
     scream and threw himself down with his face to the pillow.

     "Great heavens!" cried the inspector, "it is, indeed, the missing
     man. I know him from the photograph."

     The prisoner turned with the reckless air of a man who abandons
     himself to his destiny. "Be it so," said he. "And pray what am I
     charged with?"

     "With making away with Mr. Neville St.--Oh, come, you can't be
     charged with that unless they make a case of attempted suicide of
     it," said the inspector with a grin. "Well, I have been twenty-seven
     years in the force, but this really takes the cake."

     "If I am Mr. Neville St. Clair, then it is obvious that no crime has
     been committed, and that, therefore, I am illegally detained."

     "No crime, but a very great error has been committed," said Holmes.
     "You would have done better to have trusted your wife."

     "It was not the wife; it was the children," groaned the prisoner.
     "God help me, I would not have them ashamed of their father. My God!
     What an exposure! What can I do?"

     Sherlock Holmes sat down beside him on the couch and patted him
     kindly on the shoulder.

     "If you leave it to a court of law to clear the matter up," said he,
     "of course you can hardly avoid publicity. On the other hand, if you
     convince the police authorities that there is no possible case
     against you, I do not know that there is any reason that the details
     should find their way into the papers. Inspector Bradstreet would, I
     am sure, make notes upon anything which you might tell us and submit
     it to the proper authorities. The case would then never go into court
     at all."

     "God bless you!" cried the prisoner passionately. "I would have
     endured imprisonment, ay, even execution, rather than have left my
     miserable secret as a family blot to my children.

     "You are the first who have ever heard my story. My father was a
     schoolmaster in Chesterfield, where I received an excellent
     education. I travelled in my youth, took to the stage, and finally
     became a reporter on an evening paper in London. One day my editor
     wished to have a series of articles upon begging in the metropolis,
     and I volunteered to supply them. There was the point from which all
     my adventures started. It was only by trying begging as an amateur
     that I could get the facts upon which to base my articles. When an
     actor I had, of course, learned all the secrets of making up, and had
     been famous in the green-room for my skill. I took advantage now of
     my attainments. I painted my face, and to make myself as pitiable as
     possible I made a good scar and fixed one side of my lip in a twist
     by the aid of a small slip of flesh-coloured plaster. Then with a red
     head of hair, and an appropriate dress, I took my station in the
     business part of the city, ostensibly as a match-seller but really as
     a beggar. For seven hours I plied my trade, and when I returned home
     in the evening I found to my surprise that I had received no less
     than 26s. 4d.

     "I wrote my articles and thought little more of the matter until,
     some time later, I backed a bill for a friend and had a writ served
     upon me for ?5. I was at my wit's end where to get the money, but a
     sudden idea came to me. I begged a fortnight's grace from the
     creditor, asked for a holiday from my employers, and spent the time
     in begging in the City under my disguise. In ten days I had the money
     and had paid the debt.

     "Well, you can imagine how hard it was to settle down to arduous work
     at ? a week when I knew that I could earn as much in a day by
     smearing my face with a little paint, laying my cap on the ground,
     and sitting still. It was a long fight between my pride and the
     money, but the dollars won at last, and I threw up reporting and sat
     day after day in the corner which I had first chosen, inspiring pity
     by my ghastly face and filling my pockets with coppers. Only one man
     knew my secret. He was the keeper of a low den in which I used to
     lodge in Swandam Lane, where I could every morning emerge as a
     squalid beggar and in the evenings transform myself into a
     well-dressed man about town. This fellow, a Lascar, was well paid by
     me for his rooms, so that I knew that my secret was safe in his
     possession.

     "Well, very soon I found that I was saving considerable sums of
     money. I do not mean that any beggar in the streets of London could
     earn ?00 a year--which is less than my average takings--but I had
     exceptional advantages in my power of making up, and also in a
     facility of repartee, which improved by practice and made me quite a
     recognised character in the City. All day a stream of pennies, varied
     by silver, poured in upon me, and it was a very bad day in which I
     failed to take ?.

     "As I grew richer I grew more ambitious, took a house in the country,
     and eventually married, without anyone having a suspicion as to my
     real occupation. My dear wife knew that I had business in the City.
     She little knew what.

     "Last Monday I had finished for the day and was dressing in my room
     above the opium den when I looked out of my window and saw, to my
     horror and astonishment, that my wife was standing in the street,
     with her eyes fixed full upon me. I gave a cry of surprise, threw up
     my arms to cover my face, and, rushing to my confidant, the Lascar,
     entreated him to prevent anyone from coming up to me. I heard her
     voice downstairs, but I knew that she could not ascend. Swiftly I
     threw off my clothes, pulled on those of a beggar, and put on my
     pigments and wig. Even a wife's eyes could not pierce so complete a
     disguise. But then it occurred to me that there might be a search in
     the room, and that the clothes might betray me. I threw open the
     window, reopening by my violence a small cut which I had inflicted
     upon myself in the bedroom that morning. Then I seized my coat, which
     was weighted by the coppers which I had just transferred to it from
     the leather bag in which I carried my takings. I hurled it out of the
     window, and it disappeared into the Thames. The other clothes would
     have followed, but at that moment there was a rush of constables up
     the stair, and a few minutes after I found, rather, I confess, to my
     relief, that instead of being identified as Mr. Neville St. Clair, I
     was arrested as his murderer.

     "I do not know that there is anything else for me to explain. I was
     determined to preserve my disguise as long as possible, and hence my
     preference for a dirty face. Knowing that my wife would be terribly
     anxious, I slipped off my ring and confided it to the Lascar at a
     moment when no constable was watching me, together with a hurried
     scrawl, telling her that she had no cause to fear."

     "That note only reached her yesterday," said Holmes.

     "Good God! What a week she must have spent!"

     "The police have watched this Lascar," said Inspector Bradstreet,
     "and I can quite understand that he might find it difficult to post a
     letter unobserved. Probably he handed it to some sailor customer of
     his, who forgot all about it for some days."

     "That was it," said Holmes, nodding approvingly; "I have no doubt of
     it. But have you never been prosecuted for begging?"

     "Many times; but what was a fine to me?"

     "It must stop here, however," said Bradstreet. "If the police are to
     hush this thing up, there must be no more of Hugh Boone."

     "I have sworn it by the most solemn oaths which a man can take."

     "In that case I think that it is probable that no further steps may
     be taken. But if you are found again, then all must come out. I am
     sure, Mr. Holmes, that we are very much indebted to you for having
     cleared the matter up. I wish I knew how you reach your results."

     "I reached this one," said my friend, "by sitting upon five pillows
     and consuming an ounce of shag. I think, Watson, that if we drive to
     Baker Street we shall just be in time for breakfast."






                       THE ADVENTURE OF THE BLUE CARBUNCLE

     I had called upon my friend Sherlock Holmes upon the second morning
     after Christmas, with the intention of wishing him the compliments of
     the season. He was lounging upon the sofa in a purple dressing-gown,
     a pipe-rack within his reach upon the right, and a pile of crumpled
     morning papers, evidently newly studied, near at hand. Beside the
     couch was a wooden chair, and on the angle of the back hung a very
     seedy and disreputable hard-felt hat, much the worse for wear, and
     cracked in several places. A lens and a forceps lying upon the seat
     of the chair suggested that the hat had been suspended in this manner
     for the purpose of examination.

     "You are engaged," said I; "perhaps I interrupt you."

     "Not at all. I am glad to have a friend with whom I can discuss my
     results. The matter is a perfectly trivial one"--he jerked his thumb
     in the direction of the old hat--"but there are points in connection
     with it which are not entirely devoid of interest and even of
     instruction."

     I seated myself in his armchair and warmed my hands before his
     crackling fire, for a sharp frost had set in, and the windows were
     thick with the ice crystals. "I suppose," I remarked, "that, homely
     as it looks, this thing has some deadly story linked on to it--that
     it is the clue which will guide you in the solution of some mystery
     and the punishment of some crime."

     "No, no. No crime," said Sherlock Holmes, laughing. "Only one of
     those whimsical little incidents which will happen when you have four
     million human beings all jostling each other within the space of a
     few square miles. Amid the action and reaction of so dense a swarm of
     humanity, every possible combination of events may be expected to
     take place, and many a little problem will be presented which may be
     striking and bizarre without being criminal. We have already had
     experience of such."

     "So much so," I remarked, "that of the last six cases which I have
     added to my notes, three have been entirely free of any legal crime."

     "Precisely. You allude to my attempt to recover the Irene Adler
     papers, to the singular case of Miss Mary Sutherland, and to the
     adventure of the man with the twisted lip. Well, I have no doubt that
     this small matter will fall into the same innocent category. You know
     Peterson, the commissionaire?" 

     "Yes."

     "It is to him that this trophy belongs."

     "It is his hat."

     "No, no, he found it. Its owner is unknown. I beg that you will look
     upon it not as a battered billycock but as an intellectual problem.
     And, first, as to how it came here. It arrived upon Christmas
     morning, in company with a good fat goose, which is, I have no doubt,
     roasting at this moment in front of Peterson's fire. The facts are
     these: about four o'clock on Christmas morning, Peterson, who, as you
     know, is a very honest fellow, was returning from some small
     jollification and was making his way homeward down Tottenham Court
     Road. In front of him he saw, in the gaslight, a tallish man, walking
     with a slight stagger, and carrying a white goose slung over his
     shoulder. As he reached the corner of Goodge Street, a row broke out
     between this stranger and a little knot of roughs. One of the latter
     knocked off the man's hat, on which he raised his stick to defend
     himself and, swinging it over his head, smashed the shop window
     behind him. Peterson had rushed forward to protect the stranger from
     his assailants; but the man, shocked at having broken the window, and
     seeing an official-looking person in uniform rushing towards him,
     dropped his goose, took to his heels, and vanished amid the labyrinth
     of small streets which lie at the back of Tottenham Court Road. The
     roughs had also fled at the appearance of Peterson, so that he was
     left in possession of the field of battle, and also of the spoils of
     victory in the shape of this battered hat and a most unimpeachable
     Christmas goose."

     "Which surely he restored to their owner?"

     "My dear fellow, there lies the problem. It is true that 'For Mrs.
     Henry Baker' was printed upon a small card which was tied to the
     bird's left leg, and it is also true that the initials 'H. B.' are
     legible upon the lining of this hat, but as there are some thousands
     of Bakers, and some hundreds of Henry Bakers in this city of ours, it
     is not easy to restore lost property to any one of them."

     "What, then, did Peterson do?"

     "He brought round both hat and goose to me on Christmas morning,
     knowing that even the smallest problems are of interest to me. The
     goose we retained until this morning, when there were signs that, in
     spite of the slight frost, it would be well that it should be eaten
     without unnecessary delay. Its finder has carried it off, therefore,
     to fulfil the ultimate destiny of a goose, while I continue to retain
     the hat of the unknown gentleman who lost his Christmas dinner."

     "Did he not advertise?"

     "No."

     "Then, what clue could you have as to his identity?"

     "Only as much as we can deduce."

     "From his hat?"

     "Precisely."

     "But you are joking. What can you gather from this old battered
     felt?"

     "Here is my lens. You know my methods. What can you gather yourself
     as to the individuality of the man who has worn this article?"

     I took the tattered object in my hands and turned it over rather
     ruefully. It was a very ordinary black hat of the usual round shape,
     hard and much the worse for wear. The lining had been of red silk,
     but was a good deal discoloured. There was no maker's name; but, as
     Holmes had remarked, the initials "H. B." were scrawled upon one
     side. It was pierced in the brim for a hat-securer, but the elastic
     was missing. For the rest, it was cracked, exceedingly dusty, and
     spotted in several places, although there seemed to have been some
     attempt to hide the discoloured patches by smearing them with ink.

     "I can see nothing," said I, handing it back to my friend.

     "On the contrary, Watson, you can see everything. You fail, however,
     to reason from what you see. You are too timid in drawing your
     inferences."

     "Then, pray tell me what it is that you can infer from this hat?"

     He picked it up and gazed at it in the peculiar introspective fashion
     which was characteristic of him. "It is perhaps less suggestive than
     it might have been," he remarked, "and yet there are a few inferences
     which are very distinct, and a few others which represent at least a
     strong balance of probability. That the man was highly intellectual
     is of course obvious upon the face of it, and also that he was fairly
     well-to-do within the last three years, although he has now fallen
     upon evil days. He had foresight, but has less now than formerly,
     pointing to a moral retrogression, which, when taken with the decline
     of his fortunes, seems to indicate some evil influence, probably
     drink, at work upon him. This may account also for the obvious fact
     that his wife has ceased to love him."

     "My dear Holmes!"

     "He has, however, retained some degree of self-respect," he
     continued, disregarding my remonstrance. "He is a man who leads a
     sedentary life, goes out little, is out of training entirely, is
     middle-aged, has grizzled hair which he has had cut within the last
     few days, and which he anoints with lime-cream. These are the more
     patent facts which are to be deduced from his hat. Also, by the way,
     that it is extremely improbable that he has gas laid on in his
     house."

     "You are certainly joking, Holmes."

     "Not in the least. Is it possible that even now, when I give you
     these results, you are unable to see how they are attained?"

     "I have no doubt that I am very stupid, but I must confess that I am
     unable to follow you. For example, how did you deduce that this man
     was intellectual?"

     For answer Holmes clapped the hat upon his head. It came right over
     the forehead and settled upon the bridge of his nose. "It is a
     question of cubic capacity," said he; "a man with so large a brain
     must have something in it."

     "The decline of his fortunes, then?"

     "This hat is three years old. These flat brims curled at the edge
     came in then. It is a hat of the very best quality. Look at the band
     of ribbed silk and the excellent lining. If this man could afford to
     buy so expensive a hat three years ago, and has had no hat since,
     then he has assuredly gone down in the world."

     "Well, that is clear enough, certainly. But how about the foresight
     and the moral retrogression?"

     Sherlock Holmes laughed. "Here is the foresight," said he putting his
     finger upon the little disc and loop of the hat-securer.  "They are
     never sold upon hats. If this man ordered one, it is a sign of a
     certain amount of foresight, since he went out of his way to take
     this precaution against the wind. But since we see that he has broken
     the elastic and has not troubled to replace it, it is obvious that he
     has less foresight now than formerly, which is a distinct proof of a
     weakening nature. On the other hand, he has endeavoured to conceal
     some of these stains upon the felt by daubing them with ink, which is
     a sign that he has not entirely lost his self-respect."

     "Your reasoning is certainly plausible."

     "The further points, that he is middle-aged, that his hair is
     grizzled, that it has been recently cut, and that he uses lime-cream,
     are all to be gathered from a close examination of the lower part of
     the lining. The lens discloses a large number of hair-ends, clean cut
     by the scissors of the barber. They all appear to be adhesive, and
     there is a distinct odour of lime-cream. This dust, you will observe,
     is not the gritty, grey dust of the street but the fluffy brown dust
     of the house, showing that it has been hung up indoors most of the
     time, while the marks of moisture upon the inside are proof positive
     that the wearer perspired very freely, and could therefore, hardly be
     in the best of training."

     "But his wife--you said that she had ceased to love him."

     "This hat has not been brushed for weeks. When I see you, my dear
     Watson, with a week's accumulation of dust upon your hat, and when
     your wife allows you to go out in such a state, I shall fear that you
     also have been unfortunate enough to lose your wife's affection."

     "But he might be a bachelor."

     "Nay, he was bringing home the goose as a peace-offering to his wife.
     Remember the card upon the bird's leg."

     "You have an answer to everything. But how on earth do you deduce
     that the gas is not laid on in his house?"

     "One tallow stain, or even two, might come by chance; but when I see
     no less than five, I think that there can be little doubt that the
     individual must be brought into frequent contact with burning
     tallow--walks upstairs at night probably with his hat in one hand and
     a guttering candle in the other. Anyhow, he never got tallow-stains
     from a gas-jet. Are you satisfied?"

     "Well, it is very ingenious," said I, laughing; "but since, as you
     said just now, there has been no crime committed, and no harm done
     save the loss of a goose, all this seems to be rather a waste of
     energy."

     Sherlock Holmes had opened his mouth to reply, when the door flew
     open, and Peterson, the commissionaire, rushed into the apartment
     with flushed cheeks and the face of a man who is dazed with
     astonishment.

     "The goose, Mr. Holmes! The goose, sir!" he gasped.

     "Eh? What of it, then? Has it returned to life and flapped off
     through the kitchen window?" Holmes twisted himself round upon the
     sofa to get a fairer view of the man's excited face.

     "See here, sir! See what my wife found in its crop!" He held out his
     hand and displayed upon the centre of the palm a brilliantly
     scintillating blue stone, rather smaller than a bean in size, but of
     such purity and radiance that it twinkled like an electric point in
     the dark hollow of his hand.

     Sherlock Holmes sat up with a whistle. "By Jove, Peterson!" said he,
     "this is treasure trove indeed. I suppose you know what you have
     got?"

     "A diamond, sir? A precious stone. It cuts into glass as though it
     were putty."

     "It's more than a precious stone. It is the precious stone."

     "Not the Countess of Morcar's blue carbuncle!" I ejaculated.

     "Precisely so. I ought to know its size and shape, seeing that I have
     read the advertisement about it in The Times every day lately. It is
     absolutely unique, and its value can only be conjectured, but the
     reward offered of ?000 is certainly not within a twentieth part of
     the market price."

     "A thousand pounds! Great Lord of mercy!" The commissionaire plumped
     down into a chair and stared from one to the other of us.

     "That is the reward, and I have reason to know that there are
     sentimental considerations in the background which would induce the
     Countess to part with half her fortune if she could but recover the
     gem."

     "It was lost, if I remember aright, at the Hotel Cosmopolitan," I
     remarked.

     "Precisely so, on December 22nd, just five days ago. John Horner, a
     plumber, was accused of having abstracted it from the lady's
     jewel-case. The evidence against him was so strong that the case has
     been referred to the Assizes. I have some account of the matter here,
     I believe." He rummaged amid his newspapers, glancing over the dates,
     until at last he smoothed one out, doubled it over, and read the
     following paragraph:

     "Hotel Cosmopolitan Jewel Robbery. John Horner, 26, plumber, was
     brought up upon the charge of having upon the 22nd inst., abstracted
     from the jewel-case of the Countess of Morcar the valuable gem known
     as the blue carbuncle. James Ryder, upper-attendant at the hotel,
     gave his evidence to the effect that he had shown Horner up to the
     dressing-room of the Countess of Morcar upon the day of the robbery
     in order that he might solder the second bar of the grate, which was
     loose. He had remained with Horner some little time, but had finally
     been called away. On returning, he found that Horner had disappeared,
     that the bureau had been forced open, and that the small morocco
     casket in which, as it afterwards transpired, the Countess was
     accustomed to keep her jewel, was lying empty upon the
     dressing-table. Ryder instantly gave the alarm, and Horner was
     arrested the same evening; but the stone could not be found either
     upon his person or in his rooms. Catherine Cusack, maid to the
     Countess, deposed to having heard Ryder's cry of dismay on
     discovering the robbery, and to having rushed into the room, where
     she found matters as described by the last witness. Inspector
     Bradstreet, B division, gave evidence as to the arrest of Horner, who
     struggled frantically, and protested his innocence in the strongest
     terms. Evidence of a previous conviction for robbery having been
     given against the prisoner, the magistrate refused to deal summarily
     with the offence, but referred it to the Assizes. Horner, who had
     shown signs of intense emotion during the proceedings, fainted away
     at the conclusion and was carried out of court."

     "Hum! So much for the police-court," said Holmes thoughtfully,
     tossing aside the paper. "The question for us now to solve is the
     sequence of events leading from a rifled jewel-case at one end to the
     crop of a goose in Tottenham Court Road at the other. You see,
     Watson, our little deductions have suddenly assumed a much more
     important and less innocent aspect. Here is the stone; the stone came
     from the goose, and the goose came from Mr. Henry Baker, the
     gentleman with the bad hat and all the other characteristics with
     which I have bored you. So now we must set ourselves very seriously
     to finding this gentleman and ascertaining what part he has played in
     this little mystery. To do this, we must try the simplest means
     first, and these lie undoubtedly in an advertisement in all the
     evening papers. If this fail, I shall have recourse to other
     methods."

     "What will you say?"

     "Give me a pencil and that slip of paper. Now, then:

     'Found at the corner of Goodge Street, a goose and a black felt hat.
     Mr. Henry Baker can have the same by applying at 6.30 this evening at
     221b, Baker Street.' That is clear and concise."

     "Very. But will he see it?"

     "Well, he is sure to keep an eye on the papers, since, to a poor man,
     the loss was a heavy one. He was clearly so scared by his mischance
     in breaking the window and by the approach of Peterson that he
     thought of nothing but flight, but since then he must have bitterly
     regretted the impulse which caused him to drop his bird. Then, again,
     the introduction of his name will cause him to see it, for everyone
     who knows him will direct his attention to it. Here you are,
     Peterson, run down to the advertising agency and have this put in the
     evening papers."

     "In which, sir?"

     "Oh, in the Globe, Star, Pall Mall, St. James's, Evening News,
     Standard, Echo, and any others that occur to you."

     "Very well, sir. And this stone?"

     "Ah, yes, I shall keep the stone. Thank you. And, I say, Peterson,
     just buy a goose on your way back and leave it here with me, for we
     must have one to give to this gentleman in place of the one which
     your family is now devouring."

     When the commissionaire had gone, Holmes took up the stone and held
     it against the light. "It's a bonny thing," said he. "Just see how it
     glints and sparkles. Of course it is a nucleus and focus of crime.
     Every good stone is. They are the devil's pet baits. In the larger
     and older jewels every facet may stand for a bloody deed. This stone
     is not yet twenty years old. It was found in the banks of the Amoy
     River in southern China and is remarkable in having every
     characteristic of the carbuncle, save that it is blue in shade
     instead of ruby red. In spite of its youth, it has already a sinister
     history. There have been two murders, a vitriol-throwing, a suicide,
     and several robberies brought about for the sake of this forty-grain
     weight of crystallised charcoal. Who would think that so pretty a toy
     would be a purveyor to the gallows and the prison? I'll lock it up in
     my strong box now and drop a line to the Countess to say that we have
     it."

     "Do you think that this man Horner is innocent?"

     "I cannot tell."

     "Well, then, do you imagine that this other one, Henry Baker, had
     anything to do with the matter?"

     "It is, I think, much more likely that Henry Baker is an absolutely
     innocent man, who had no idea that the bird which he was carrying was
     of considerably more value than if it were made of solid gold. That,
     however, I shall determine by a very simple test if we have an answer
     to our advertisement."

     "And you can do nothing until then?"

     "Nothing."

     "In that case I shall continue my professional round. But I shall
     come back in the evening at the hour you have mentioned, for I should
     like to see the solution of so tangled a business."

     "Very glad to see you. I dine at seven. There is a woodcock, I
     believe. By the way, in view of recent occurrences, perhaps I ought
     to ask Mrs. Hudson to examine its crop."

     I had been delayed at a case, and it was a little after half-past six
     when I found myself in Baker Street once more. As I approached the
     house I saw a tall man in a Scotch bonnet with a coat which was
     buttoned up to his chin waiting outside in the bright semicircle
     which was thrown from the fanlight. Just as I arrived the door was
     opened, and we were shown up together to Holmes' room.

     "Mr. Henry Baker, I believe," said he, rising from his armchair and
     greeting his visitor with the easy air of geniality which he could so
     readily assume. "Pray take this chair by the fire, Mr. Baker. It is a
     cold night, and I observe that your circulation is more adapted for
     summer than for winter. Ah, Watson, you have just come at the right
     time. Is that your hat, Mr. Baker?"

     "Yes, sir, that is undoubtedly my hat."

     He was a large man with rounded shoulders, a massive head, and a
     broad, intelligent face, sloping down to a pointed beard of grizzled
     brown. A touch of red in nose and cheeks, with a slight tremor of his
     extended hand, recalled Holmes' surmise as to his habits. His rusty
     black frock-coat was buttoned right up in front, with the collar
     turned up, and his lank wrists protruded from his sleeves without a
     sign of cuff or shirt. He spoke in a slow staccato fashion, choosing
     his words with care, and gave the impression generally of a man of
     learning and letters who had had ill-usage at the hands of fortune.

     "We have retained these things for some days," said Holmes, "because
     we expected to see an advertisement from you giving your address. I
     am at a loss to know now why you did not advertise."

     Our visitor gave a rather shamefaced laugh. "Shillings have not been
     so plentiful with me as they once were," he remarked. "I had no doubt
     that the gang of roughs who assaulted me had carried off both my hat
     and the bird. I did not care to spend more money in a hopeless
     attempt at recovering them."

     "Very naturally. By the way, about the bird, we were compelled to eat
     it."

     "To eat it!" Our visitor half rose from his chair in his excitement.

     "Yes, it would have been of no use to anyone had we not done so. But
     I presume that this other goose upon the sideboard, which is about
     the same weight and perfectly fresh, will answer your purpose equally
     well?"

     "Oh, certainly, certainly," answered Mr. Baker with a sigh of relief.

     "Of course, we still have the feathers, legs, crop, and so on of your
     own bird, so if you wish--"

     The man burst into a hearty laugh. "They might be useful to me as
     relics of my adventure," said he, "but beyond that I can hardly see
     what use the disjecta membra of my late acquaintance are going to be
     to me. No, sir, I think that, with your permission, I will confine my
     attentions to the excellent bird which I perceive upon the
     sideboard."

     Sherlock Holmes glanced sharply across at me with a slight shrug of
     his shoulders.

     "There is your hat, then, and there your bird," said he. "By the way,
     would it bore you to tell me where you got the other one from? I am
     somewhat of a fowl fancier, and I have seldom seen a better grown
     goose."

     "Certainly, sir," said Baker, who had risen and tucked his newly
     gained property under his arm. "There are a few of us who frequent
     the Alpha Inn, near the Museum--we are to be found in the Museum
     itself during the day, you understand. This year our good host,
     Windigate by name, instituted a goose club, by which, on
     consideration of some few pence every week, we were each to receive a
     bird at Christmas. My pence were duly paid, and the rest is familiar
     to you. I am much indebted to you, sir, for a Scotch bonnet is fitted
     neither to my years nor my gravity." With a comical pomposity of
     manner he bowed solemnly to both of us and strode off upon his way.

     "So much for Mr. Henry Baker," said Holmes when he had closed the
     door behind him. "It is quite certain that he knows nothing whatever
     about the matter. Are you hungry, Watson?"

     "Not particularly."

     "Then I suggest that we turn our dinner into a supper and follow up
     this clue while it is still hot."

     "By all means."

     It was a bitter night, so we drew on our ulsters and wrapped cravats
     about our throats. Outside, the stars were shining coldly in a
     cloudless sky, and the breath of the passers-by blew out into smoke
     like so many pistol shots. Our footfalls rang out crisply and loudly
     as we swung through the doctors' quarter, Wimpole Street, Harley
     Street, and so through Wigmore Street into Oxford Street. In a
     quarter of an hour we were in Bloomsbury at the Alpha Inn, which is a
     small public-house at the corner of one of the streets which runs
     down into Holborn. Holmes pushed open the door of the private bar and
     ordered two glasses of beer from the ruddy-faced, white-aproned
     landlord.

     "Your beer should be excellent if it is as good as your geese," said
     he.

     "My geese!" The man seemed surprised.

     "Yes. I was speaking only half an hour ago to Mr. Henry Baker, who
     was a member of your goose club."

     "Ah! yes, I see. But you see, sir, them's not our geese."

     "Indeed! Whose, then?"

     "Well, I got the two dozen from a salesman in Covent Garden."

     "Indeed? I know some of them. Which was it?"

     "Breckinridge is his name."

     "Ah! I don't know him. Well, here's your good health landlord, and
     prosperity to your house. Good-night."

     "Now for Mr. Breckinridge," he continued, buttoning up his coat as we
     came out into the frosty air. "Remember, Watson that though we have
     so homely a thing as a goose at one end of this chain, we have at the
     other a man who will certainly get seven years' penal servitude
     unless we can establish his innocence. It is possible that our
     inquiry may but confirm his guilt; but, in any case, we have a line
     of investigation which has been missed by the police, and which a
     singular chance has placed in our hands. Let us follow it out to the
     bitter end. Faces to the south, then, and quick march!"

     We passed across Holborn, down Endell Street, and so through a zigzag
     of slums to Covent Garden Market. One of the largest stalls bore the
     name of Breckinridge upon it, and the proprietor a horsey-looking
     man, with a sharp face and trim side-whiskers was helping a boy to
     put up the shutters.

     "Good-evening. It's a cold night," said Holmes.

     The salesman nodded and shot a questioning glance at my companion.

     "Sold out of geese, I see," continued Holmes, pointing at the bare
     slabs of marble.

     "Let you have five hundred to-morrow morning."

     "That's no good."

     "Well, there are some on the stall with the gas-flare."

     "Ah, but I was recommended to you."

     "Who by?"

     "The landlord of the Alpha."

     "Oh, yes; I sent him a couple of dozen."

     "Fine birds they were, too. Now where did you get them from?"

     To my surprise the question provoked a burst of anger from the
     salesman.

     "Now, then, mister," said he, with his head cocked and his arms
     akimbo, "what are you driving at? Let's have it straight, now."

     "It is straight enough. I should like to know who sold you the geese
     which you supplied to the Alpha."

     "Well then, I shan't tell you. So now!"

     "Oh, it is a matter of no importance; but I don't know why you should
     be so warm over such a trifle."

     "Warm! You'd be as warm, maybe, if you were as pestered as I am. When
     I pay good money for a good article there should be an end of the
     business; but it's 'Where are the geese?' and 'Who did you sell the
     geese to?' and 'What will you take for the geese?' One would think
     they were the only geese in the world, to hear the fuss that is made
     over them."

     "Well, I have no connection with any other people who have been
     making inquiries," said Holmes carelessly. "If you won't tell us the
     bet is off, that is all. But I'm always ready to back my opinion on a
     matter of fowls, and I have a fiver on it that the bird I ate is
     country bred."

     "Well, then, you've lost your fiver, for it's town bred," snapped the
     salesman.

     "It's nothing of the kind."

     "I say it is."

     "I don't believe it."

     "D'you think you know more about fowls than I, who have handled them
     ever since I was a nipper? I tell you, all those birds that went to
     the Alpha were town bred."

     "You'll never persuade me to believe that."

     "Will you bet, then?"

     "It's merely taking your money, for I know that I am right. But I'll
     have a sovereign on with you, just to teach you not to be obstinate."

     The salesman chuckled grimly. "Bring me the books, Bill," said he.

     The small boy brought round a small thin volume and a great
     greasy-backed one, laying them out together beneath the hanging lamp.

     "Now then, Mr. Cocksure," said the salesman, "I thought that I was
     out of geese, but before I finish you'll find that there is still one
     left in my shop. You see this little book?"

     "Well?"

     "That's the list of the folk from whom I buy. D'you see? Well, then,
     here on this page are the country folk, and the numbers after their
     names are where their accounts are in the big ledger. Now, then! You
     see this other page in red ink? Well, that is a list of my town
     suppliers. Now, look at that third name. Just read it out to me."

     "Mrs. Oakshott, 117, Brixton Road--249," read Holmes.

     "Quite so. Now turn that up in the ledger."

     Holmes turned to the page indicated. "Here you are, 'Mrs. Oakshott,
     117, Brixton Road, egg and poultry supplier.'"

     "Now, then, what's the last entry?"

     "'December 22nd. Twenty-four geese at 7s. 6d.'"

     "Quite so. There you are. And underneath?"

     "'Sold to Mr. Windigate of the Alpha, at 12s.'"

     "What have you to say now?"

     Sherlock Holmes looked deeply chagrined. He drew a sovereign from his
     pocket and threw it down upon the slab, turning away with the air of
     a man whose disgust is too deep for words. A few yards off he stopped
     under a lamp-post and laughed in the hearty, noiseless fashion which
     was peculiar to him.

     "When you see a man with whiskers of that cut and the 'Pink 'un'
     protruding out of his pocket, you can always draw him by a bet," said
     he. "I daresay that if I had put ?00 down in front of him, that man
     would not have given me such complete information as was drawn from
     him by the idea that he was doing me on a wager. Well, Watson, we
     are, I fancy, nearing the end of our quest, and the only point which
     remains to be determined is whether we should go on to this Mrs.
     Oakshott to-night, or whether we should reserve it for to-morrow. It
     is clear from what that surly fellow said that there are others
     besides ourselves who are anxious about the matter, and I should--"

     His remarks were suddenly cut short by a loud hubbub which broke out
     from the stall which we had just left. Turning round we saw a little
     rat-faced fellow standing in the centre of the circle of yellow light
     which was thrown by the swinging lamp, while Breckinridge, the
     salesman, framed in the door of his stall, was shaking his fists
     fiercely at the cringing figure.

     "I've had enough of you and your geese," he shouted. "I wish you were
     all at the devil together. If you come pestering me any more with
     your silly talk I'll set the dog at you. You bring Mrs. Oakshott here
     and I'll answer her, but what have you to do with it? Did I buy the
     geese off you?"

     "No; but one of them was mine all the same," whined the little man.

     "Well, then, ask Mrs. Oakshott for it."

     "She told me to ask you."

     "Well, you can ask the King of Proosia, for all I care. I've had
     enough of it. Get out of this!" He rushed fiercely forward, and the
     inquirer flitted away into the darkness.

     "Ha! this may save us a visit to Brixton Road," whispered Holmes.
     "Come with me, and we will see what is to be made of this fellow."
     Striding through the scattered knots of people who lounged round the
     flaring stalls, my companion speedily overtook the little man and
     touched him upon the shoulder. He sprang round, and I could see in
     the gas-light that every vestige of colour had been driven from his
     face.

     "Who are you, then? What do you want?" he asked in a quavering voice.

     "You will excuse me," said Holmes blandly, "but I could not help
     overhearing the questions which you put to the salesman just now. I
     think that I could be of assistance to you."

     "You? Who are you? How could you know anything of the matter?"

     "My name is Sherlock Holmes. It is my business to know what other
     people don't know."

     "But you can know nothing of this?"

     "Excuse me, I know everything of it. You are endeavouring to trace
     some geese which were sold by Mrs. Oakshott, of Brixton Road, to a
     salesman named Breckinridge, by him in turn to Mr. Windigate, of the
     Alpha, and by him to his club, of which Mr. Henry Baker is a member."

     "Oh, sir, you are the very man whom I have longed to meet," cried the
     little fellow with outstretched hands and quivering fingers. "I can
     hardly explain to you how interested I am in this matter."

     Sherlock Holmes hailed a four-wheeler which was passing. "In that
     case we had better discuss it in a cosy room rather than in this
     wind-swept market-place," said he. "But pray tell me, before we go
     farther, who it is that I have the pleasure of assisting."

     The man hesitated for an instant. "My name is John Robinson," he
     answered with a sidelong glance.

     "No, no; the real name," said Holmes sweetly. "It is always awkward
     doing business with an alias."

     A flush sprang to the white cheeks of the stranger. "Well then," said
     he, "my real name is James Ryder."

     "Precisely so. Head attendant at the Hotel Cosmopolitan. Pray step
     into the cab, and I shall soon be able to tell you everything which
     you would wish to know."

     The little man stood glancing from one to the other of us with
     half-frightened, half-hopeful eyes, as one who is not sure whether he
     is on the verge of a windfall or of a catastrophe. Then he stepped
     into the cab, and in half an hour we were back in the sitting-room at
     Baker Street. Nothing had been said during our drive, but the high,
     thin breathing of our new companion, and the claspings and
     unclaspings of his hands, spoke of the nervous tension within him.

     "Here we are!" said Holmes cheerily as we filed into the room. "The
     fire looks very seasonable in this weather. You look cold, Mr. Ryder.
     Pray take the basket-chair. I will just put on my slippers before we
     settle this little matter of yours. Now, then! You want to know what
     became of those geese?"

     "Yes, sir."

     "Or rather, I fancy, of that goose. It was one bird, I imagine in
     which you were interested--white, with a black bar across the tail."

     Ryder quivered with emotion. "Oh, sir," he cried, "can you tell me
     where it went to?"

     "It came here."

     "Here?"

     "Yes, and a most remarkable bird it proved. I don't wonder that you
     should take an interest in it. It laid an egg after it was dead--the
     bonniest, brightest little blue egg that ever was seen. I have it
     here in my museum."

     Our visitor staggered to his feet and clutched the mantelpiece with
     his right hand. Holmes unlocked his strong-box and held up the blue
     carbuncle, which shone out like a star, with a cold, brilliant,
     many-pointed radiance. Ryder stood glaring with a drawn face,
     uncertain whether to claim or to disown it.

     "The game's up, Ryder," said Holmes quietly. "Hold up, man, or you'll
     be into the fire! Give him an arm back into his chair, Watson. He's
     not got blood enough to go in for felony with impunity. Give him a
     dash of brandy. So! Now he looks a little more human. What a shrimp
     it is, to be sure!"

     For a moment he had staggered and nearly fallen, but the brandy
     brought a tinge of colour into his cheeks, and he sat staring with
     frightened eyes at his accuser.

     "I have almost every link in my hands, and all the proofs which I
     could possibly need, so there is little which you need tell me.
     Still, that little may as well be cleared up to make the case
     complete. You had heard, Ryder, of this blue stone of the Countess of
     Morcar's?"

     "It was Catherine Cusack who told me of it," said he in a crackling
     voice.

     "I see--her ladyship's waiting-maid. Well, the temptation of sudden
     wealth so easily acquired was too much for you, as it has been for
     better men before you; but you were not very scrupulous in the means
     you used. It seems to me, Ryder, that there is the making of a very
     pretty villain in you. You knew that this man Horner, the plumber,
     had been concerned in some such matter before, and that suspicion
     would rest the more readily upon him. What did you do, then? You made
     some small job in my lady's room--you and your confederate
     Cusack--and you managed that he should be the man sent for. Then,
     when he had left, you rifled the jewel-case, raised the alarm, and
     had this unfortunate man arrested. You then--"

     Ryder threw himself down suddenly upon the rug and clutched at my
     companion's knees. "For God's sake, have mercy!" he shrieked. "Think
     of my father! Of my mother! It would break their hearts. I never went
     wrong before! I never will again. I swear it. I'll swear it on a
     Bible. Oh, don't bring it into court! For Christ's sake, don't!"

     "Get back into your chair!" said Holmes sternly. "It is very well to
     cringe and crawl now, but you thought little enough of this poor
     Horner in the dock for a crime of which he knew nothing."

     "I will fly, Mr. Holmes. I will leave the country, sir. Then the
     charge against him will break down."

     "Hum! We will talk about that. And now let us hear a true account of
     the next act. How came the stone into the goose, and how came the
     goose into the open market? Tell us the truth, for there lies your
     only hope of safety."

     Ryder passed his tongue over his parched lips. "I will tell you it
     just as it happened, sir," said he. "When Horner had been arrested,
     it seemed to me that it would be best for me to get away with the
     stone at once, for I did not know at what moment the police might not
     take it into their heads to search me and my room. There was no place
     about the hotel where it would be safe. I went out, as if on some
     commission, and I made for my sister's house. She had married a man
     named Oakshott, and lived in Brixton Road, where she fattened fowls
     for the market. All the way there every man I met seemed to me to be
     a policeman or a detective; and, for all that it was a cold night,
     the sweat was pouring down my face before I came to the Brixton Road.
     My sister asked me what was the matter, and why I was so pale; but I
     told her that I had been upset by the jewel robbery at the hotel.
     Then I went into the back yard and smoked a pipe and wondered what it
     would be best to do.

     "I had a friend once called Maudsley, who went to the bad, and has
     just been serving his time in Pentonville. One day he had met me, and
     fell into talk about the ways of thieves, and how they could get rid
     of what they stole. I knew that he would be true to me, for I knew
     one or two things about him; so I made up my mind to go right on to
     Kilburn, where he lived, and take him into my confidence. He would
     show me how to turn the stone into money. But how to get to him in
     safety? I thought of the agonies I had gone through in coming from
     the hotel. I might at any moment be seized and searched, and there
     would be the stone in my waistcoat pocket. I was leaning against the
     wall at the time and looking at the geese which were waddling about
     round my feet, and suddenly an idea came into my head which showed me
     how I could beat the best detective that ever lived.

     "My sister had told me some weeks before that I might have the pick
     of her geese for a Christmas present, and I knew that she was always
     as good as her word. I would take my goose now, and in it I would
     carry my stone to Kilburn. There was a little shed in the yard, and
     behind this I drove one of the birds--a fine big one, white, with a
     barred tail. I caught it, and prying its bill open, I thrust the
     stone down its throat as far as my finger could reach. The bird gave
     a gulp, and I felt the stone pass along its gullet and down into its
     crop. But the creature flapped and struggled, and out came my sister
     to know what was the matter. As I turned to speak to her the brute
     broke loose and fluttered off among the others.

     "'Whatever were you doing with that bird, Jem?' says she.

     "'Well,' said I, 'you said you'd give me one for Christmas, and I was
     feeling which was the fattest.'

     "'Oh,' says she, 'we've set yours aside for you--Jem's bird, we call
     it. It's the big white one over yonder. There's twenty-six of them,
     which makes one for you, and one for us, and two dozen for the
     market.'

     "'Thank you, Maggie,' says I; 'but if it is all the same to you, I'd
     rather have that one I was handling just now.'

     "'The other is a good three pound heavier,' said she, 'and we
     fattened it expressly for you.'

     "'Never mind. I'll have the other, and I'll take it now,' said I.

     "'Oh, just as you like,' said she, a little huffed. 'Which is it you
     want, then?'

     "'That white one with the barred tail, right in the middle of the
     flock.'

     "'Oh, very well. Kill it and take it with you.'

     "Well, I did what she said, Mr. Holmes, and I carried the bird all
     the way to Kilburn. I told my pal what I had done, for he was a man
     that it was easy to tell a thing like that to. He laughed until he
     choked, and we got a knife and opened the goose. My heart turned to
     water, for there was no sign of the stone, and I knew that some
     terrible mistake had occurred. I left the bird, rushed back to my
     sister's, and hurried into the back yard. There was not a bird to be
     seen there.

     "'Where are they all, Maggie?' I cried.

     "'Gone to the dealer's, Jem.'

     "'Which dealer's?'

     "'Breckinridge, of Covent Garden.'

     "'But was there another with a barred tail?' I asked, 'the same as
     the one I chose?'

     "'Yes, Jem; there were two barred-tailed ones, and I could never tell
     them apart.'

     "Well, then, of course I saw it all, and I ran off as hard as my feet
     would carry me to this man Breckinridge; but he had sold the lot at
     once, and not one word would he tell me as to where they had gone.
     You heard him yourselves to-night. Well, he has always answered me
     like that. My sister thinks that I am going mad. Sometimes I think
     that I am myself. And now--and now I am myself a branded thief,
     without ever having touched the wealth for which I sold my character.
     God help me! God help me!" He burst into convulsive sobbing, with his
     face buried in his hands.

     There was a long silence, broken only by his heavy breathing and by
     the measured tapping of Sherlock Holmes' finger-tips upon the edge of
     the table. Then my friend rose and threw open the door.

     "Get out!" said he.

     "What, sir! Oh, Heaven bless you!"

     "No more words. Get out!"

     And no more words were needed. There was a rush, a clatter upon the
     stairs, the bang of a door, and the crisp rattle of running footfalls
     from the street.

     "After all, Watson," said Holmes, reaching up his hand for his clay
     pipe, "I am not retained by the police to supply their deficiencies.
     If Horner were in danger it would be another thing; but this fellow
     will not appear against him, and the case must collapse. I suppose
     that I am commuting a felony, but it is just possible that I am
     saving a soul. This fellow will not go wrong again; he is too
     terribly frightened. Send him to jail now, and you make him a
     jail-bird for life. Besides, it is the season of forgiveness. Chance
     has put in our way a most singular and whimsical problem, and its
     solution is its own reward. If you will have the goodness to touch
     the bell, Doctor, we will begin another investigation, in which, also
     a bird will be the chief feature."






                       THE ADVENTURE OF THE SPECKLED BAND

     On glancing over my notes of the seventy odd cases in which I have
     during the last eight years studied the methods of my friend Sherlock
     Holmes, I find many tragic, some comic, a large number merely
     strange, but none commonplace; for, working as he did rather for the
     love of his art than for the acquirement of wealth, he refused to
     associate himself with any investigation which did not tend towards
     the unusual, and even the fantastic. Of all these varied cases,
     however, I cannot recall any which presented more singular features
     than that which was associated with the well-known Surrey family of
     the Roylotts of Stoke Moran. The events in question occurred in the
     early days of my association with Holmes, when we were sharing rooms
     as bachelors in Baker Street. It is possible that I might have placed
     them upon record before, but a promise of secrecy was made at the
     time, from which I have only been freed during the last month by the
     untimely death of the lady to whom the pledge was given. It is
     perhaps as well that the facts should now come to light, for I have
     reasons to know that there are widespread rumours as to the death of
     Dr. Grimesby Roylott which tend to make the matter even more terrible
     than the truth.

     It was early in April in the year '83 that I woke one morning to find
     Sherlock Holmes standing, fully dressed, by the side of my bed. He
     was a late riser, as a rule, and as the clock on the mantelpiece
     showed me that it was only a quarter-past seven, I blinked up at him
     in some surprise, and perhaps just a little resentment, for I was
     myself regular in my habits.

     "Very sorry to knock you up, Watson," said he, "but it's the common
     lot this morning. Mrs. Hudson has been knocked up, she retorted upon
     me, and I on you."

     "What is it, then--a fire?"

     "No; a client. It seems that a young lady has arrived in a
     considerable state of excitement, who insists upon seeing me. She is
     waiting now in the sitting-room. Now, when young ladies wander about
     the metropolis at this hour of the morning, and knock sleepy people
     up out of their beds, I presume that it is something very pressing
     which they have to communicate. Should it prove to be an interesting
     case, you would, I am sure, wish to follow it from the outset. I
     thought, at any rate, that I should call you and give you the
     chance."

     "My dear fellow, I would not miss it for anything."

     I had no keener pleasure than in following Holmes in his professional
     investigations, and in admiring the rapid deductions, as swift as
     intuitions, and yet always founded on a logical basis with which he
     unravelled the problems which were submitted to him. I rapidly threw
     on my clothes and was ready in a few minutes to accompany my friend
     down to the sitting-room. A lady dressed in black and heavily veiled,
     who had been sitting in the window, rose as we entered.

     "Good-morning, madam," said Holmes cheerily. "My name is Sherlock
     Holmes. This is my intimate friend and associate, Dr. Watson, before
     whom you can speak as freely as before myself. Ha! I am glad to see
     that Mrs. Hudson has had the good sense to light the fire. Pray draw
     up to it, and I shall order you a cup of hot coffee, for I observe
     that you are shivering."

     "It is not cold which makes me shiver," said the woman in a low
     voice, changing her seat as requested.

     "What, then?"

     "It is fear, Mr. Holmes. It is terror." She raised her veil as she
     spoke, and we could see that she was indeed in a pitiable state of
     agitation, her face all drawn and grey, with restless frightened
     eyes, like those of some hunted animal. Her features and figure were
     those of a woman of thirty, but her hair was shot with premature
     grey, and her expression was weary and haggard. Sherlock Holmes ran
     her over with one of his quick, all-comprehensive glances.

     "You must not fear," said he soothingly, bending forward and patting
     her forearm. "We shall soon set matters right, I have no doubt. You
     have come in by train this morning, I see."

     "You know me, then?"

     "No, but I observe the second half of a return ticket in the palm of
     your left glove. You must have started early, and yet you had a good
     drive in a dog-cart, along heavy roads, before you reached the
     station."

     The lady gave a violent start and stared in bewilderment at my
     companion.

     "There is no mystery, my dear madam," said he, smiling. "The left arm
     of your jacket is spattered with mud in no less than seven places.
     The marks are perfectly fresh. There is no vehicle save a dog-cart
     which throws up mud in that way, and then only when you sit on the
     left-hand side of the driver."

     "Whatever your reasons may be, you are perfectly correct," said she.
     "I started from home before six, reached Leatherhead at twenty past,
     and came in by the first train to Waterloo. Sir, I can stand this
     strain no longer; I shall go mad if it continues. I have no one to
     turn to--none, save only one, who cares for me, and he, poor fellow,
     can be of little aid. I have heard of you, Mr. Holmes; I have heard
     of you from Mrs. Farintosh, whom you helped in the hour of her sore
     need. It was from her that I had your address. Oh, sir, do you not
     think that you could help me, too, and at least throw a little light
     through the dense darkness which surrounds me? At present it is out
     of my power to reward you for your services, but in a month or six
     weeks I shall be married, with the control of my own income, and then
     at least you shall not find me ungrateful."

     Holmes turned to his desk and, unlocking it, drew out a small
     case-book, which he consulted.

     "Farintosh," said he. "Ah yes, I recall the case; it was concerned
     with an opal tiara. I think it was before your time, Watson. I can
     only say, madam, that I shall be happy to devote the same care to
     your case as I did to that of your friend. As to reward, my
     profession is its own reward; but you are at liberty to defray
     whatever expenses I may be put to, at the time which suits you best.
     And now I beg that you will lay before us everything that may help us
     in forming an opinion upon the matter."

     "Alas!" replied our visitor, "the very horror of my situation lies in
     the fact that my fears are so vague, and my suspicions depend so
     entirely upon small points, which might seem trivial to another, that
     even he to whom of all others I have a right to look for help and
     advice looks upon all that I tell him about it as the fancies of a
     nervous woman. He does not say so, but I can read it from his
     soothing answers and averted eyes. But I have heard, Mr. Holmes, that
     you can see deeply into the manifold wickedness of the human heart.
     You may advise me how to walk amid the dangers which encompass me."

     "I am all attention, madam."

     "My name is Helen Stoner, and I am living with my stepfather, who is
     the last survivor of one of the oldest Saxon families in England, the
     Roylotts of Stoke Moran, on the western border of Surrey."

     Holmes nodded his head. "The name is familiar to me," said he.

     "The family was at one time among the richest in England, and the
     estates extended over the borders into Berkshire in the north, and
     Hampshire in the west. In the last century, however, four successive
     heirs were of a dissolute and wasteful disposition, and the family
     ruin was eventually completed by a gambler in the days of the
     Regency. Nothing was left save a few acres of ground, and the
     two-hundred-year-old house, which is itself crushed under a heavy
     mortgage. The last squire dragged out his existence there, living the
     horrible life of an aristocratic pauper; but his only son, my
     stepfather, seeing that he must adapt himself to the new conditions,
     obtained an advance from a relative, which enabled him to take a
     medical degree and went out to Calcutta, where, by his professional
     skill and his force of character, he established a large practice. In
     a fit of anger, however, caused by some robberies which had been
     perpetrated in the house, he beat his native butler to death and
     narrowly escaped a capital sentence. As it was, he suffered a long
     term of imprisonment and afterwards returned to England a morose and
     disappointed man.

     "When Dr. Roylott was in India he married my mother, Mrs. Stoner, the
     young widow of Major-General Stoner, of the Bengal Artillery. My
     sister Julia and I were twins, and we were only two years old at the
     time of my mother's re-marriage. She had a considerable sum of
     money--not less than ?000 a year--and this she bequeathed to Dr.
     Roylott entirely while we resided with him, with a provision that a
     certain annual sum should be allowed to each of us in the event of
     our marriage. Shortly after our return to England my mother died--she
     was killed eight years ago in a railway accident near Crewe. Dr.
     Roylott then abandoned his attempts to establish himself in practice
     in London and took us to live with him in the old ancestral house at
     Stoke Moran. The money which my mother had left was enough for all
     our wants, and there seemed to be no obstacle to our happiness.

     "But a terrible change came over our stepfather about this time.
     Instead of making friends and exchanging visits with our neighbours,
     who had at first been overjoyed to see a Roylott of Stoke Moran back
     in the old family seat, he shut himself up in his house and seldom
     came out save to indulge in ferocious quarrels with whoever might
     cross his path. Violence of temper approaching to mania has been
     hereditary in the men of the family, and in my stepfather's case it
     had, I believe, been intensified by his long residence in the
     tropics. A series of disgraceful brawls took place, two of which
     ended in the police-court, until at last he became the terror of the
     village, and the folks would fly at his approach, for he is a man of
     immense strength, and absolutely uncontrollable in his anger.

     "Last week he hurled the local blacksmith over a parapet into a
     stream, and it was only by paying over all the money which I could
     gather together that I was able to avert another public exposure. He
     had no friends at all save the wandering gypsies, and he would give
     these vagabonds leave to encamp upon the few acres of bramble-covered
     land which represent the family estate, and would accept in return
     the hospitality of their tents, wandering away with them sometimes
     for weeks on end. He has a passion also for Indian animals, which are
     sent over to him by a correspondent, and he has at this moment a
     cheetah and a baboon, which wander freely over his grounds and are
     feared by the villagers almost as much as their master.

     "You can imagine from what I say that my poor sister Julia and I had
     no great pleasure in our lives. No servant would stay with us, and
     for a long time we did all the work of the house. She was but thirty
     at the time of her death, and yet her hair had already begun to
     whiten, even as mine has."

     "Your sister is dead, then?"

     "She died just two years ago, and it is of her death that I wish to
     speak to you. You can understand that, living the life which I have
     described, we were little likely to see anyone of our own age and
     position. We had, however, an aunt, my mother's maiden sister, Miss
     Honoria Westphail, who lives near Harrow, and we were occasionally
     allowed to pay short visits at this lady's house. Julia went there at
     Christmas two years ago, and met there a half-pay major of marines,
     to whom she became engaged. My stepfather learned of the engagement
     when my sister returned and offered no objection to the marriage; but
     within a fortnight of the day which had been fixed for the wedding,
     the terrible event occurred which has deprived me of my only
     companion."

     Sherlock Holmes had been leaning back in his chair with his eyes
     closed and his head sunk in a cushion, but he half opened his lids
     now and glanced across at his visitor.

     "Pray be precise as to details," said he.

     "It is easy for me to be so, for every event of that dreadful time is
     seared into my memory. The manor-house is, as I have already said,
     very old, and only one wing is now inhabited. The bedrooms in this
     wing are on the ground floor, the sitting-rooms being in the central
     block of the buildings. Of these bedrooms the first is Dr. Roylott's,
     the second my sister's, and the third my own. There is no
     communication between them, but they all open out into the same
     corridor. Do I make myself plain?"

     "Perfectly so."

     "The windows of the three rooms open out upon the lawn. That fatal
     night Dr. Roylott had gone to his room early, though we knew that he
     had not retired to rest, for my sister was troubled by the smell of
     the strong Indian cigars which it was his custom to smoke. She left
     her room, therefore, and came into mine, where she sat for some time,
     chatting about her approaching wedding. At eleven o'clock she rose to
     leave me, but she paused at the door and looked back.

     "'Tell me, Helen,' said she, 'have you ever heard anyone whistle in
     the dead of the night?'

     "'Never,' said I.

     "'I suppose that you could not possibly whistle, yourself, in your
     sleep?'

     "'Certainly not. But why?'

     "'Because during the last few nights I have always, about three in
     the morning, heard a low, clear whistle. I am a light sleeper, and it
     has awakened me. I cannot tell where it came from--perhaps from the
     next room, perhaps from the lawn. I thought that I would just ask you
     whether you had heard it.'

     "'No, I have not. It must be those wretched gipsies in the
     plantation.'

     "'Very likely. And yet if it were on the lawn, I wonder that you did
     not hear it also.'

     "'Ah, but I sleep more heavily than you.'

     "'Well, it is of no great consequence, at any rate.' She smiled back
     at me, closed my door, and a few moments later I heard her key turn
     in the lock."

     "Indeed," said Holmes. "Was it your custom always to lock yourselves
     in at night?"

     "Always."

     "And why?"

     "I think that I mentioned to you that the doctor kept a cheetah and a
     baboon. We had no feeling of security unless our doors were locked."

     "Quite so. Pray proceed with your statement."

     "I could not sleep that night. A vague feeling of impending
     misfortune impressed me. My sister and I, you will recollect, were
     twins, and you know how subtle are the links which bind two souls
     which are so closely allied. It was a wild night. The wind was
     howling outside, and the rain was beating and splashing against the
     windows. Suddenly, amid all the hubbub of the gale, there burst forth
     the wild scream of a terrified woman. I knew that it was my sister's
     voice. I sprang from my bed, wrapped a shawl round me, and rushed
     into the corridor. As I opened my door I seemed to hear a low
     whistle, such as my sister described, and a few moments later a
     clanging sound, as if a mass of metal had fallen. As I ran down the
     passage, my sister's door was unlocked, and revolved slowly upon its
     hinges. I stared at it horror-stricken, not knowing what was about to
     issue from it. By the light of the corridor-lamp I saw my sister
     appear at the opening, her face blanched with terror, her hands
     groping for help, her whole figure swaying to and fro like that of a
     drunkard. I ran to her and threw my arms round her, but at that
     moment her knees seemed to give way and she fell to the ground.  She
     writhed as one who is in terrible pain, and her limbs were dreadfully
     convulsed. At first I thought that she had not recognised me, but as
     I bent over her she suddenly shrieked out in a voice which I shall
     never forget, 'Oh, my God! Helen! It was the band! The speckled
     band!' There was something else which she would fain have said, and
     she stabbed with her finger into the air in the direction of the
     doctor's room, but a fresh convulsion seized her and choked her
     words. I rushed out, calling loudly for my stepfather, and I met him
     hastening from his room in his dressing-gown. When he reached my
     sister's side she was unconscious, and though he poured brandy down
     her throat and sent for medical aid from the village, all efforts
     were in vain, for she slowly sank and died without having recovered
     her consciousness. Such was the dreadful end of my beloved sister."

     "One moment," said Holmes, "are you sure about this whistle and
     metallic sound? Could you swear to it?"

     "That was what the county coroner asked me at the inquiry. It is my
     strong impression that I heard it, and yet, among the crash of the
     gale and the creaking of an old house, I may possibly have been
     deceived."

     "Was your sister dressed?"

     "No, she was in her night-dress. In her right hand was found the
     charred stump of a match, and in her left a match-box."

     "Showing that she had struck a light and looked about her when the
     alarm took place. That is important. And what conclusions did the
     coroner come to?"

     "He investigated the case with great care, for Dr. Roylott's conduct
     had long been notorious in the county, but he was unable to find any
     satisfactory cause of death. My evidence showed that the door had
     been fastened upon the inner side, and the windows were blocked by
     old-fashioned shutters with broad iron bars, which were secured every
     night. The walls were carefully sounded, and were shown to be quite
     solid all round, and the flooring was also thoroughly examined, with
     the same result. The chimney is wide, but is barred up by four large
     staples. It is certain, therefore, that my sister was quite alone
     when she met her end. Besides, there were no marks of any violence
     upon her."

     "How about poison?"

     "The doctors examined her for it, but without success."

     "What do you think that this unfortunate lady died of, then?"

     "It is my belief that she died of pure fear and nervous shock, though
     what it was that frightened her I cannot imagine."

     "Were there gipsies in the plantation at the time?"

     "Yes, there are nearly always some there."

     "Ah, and what did you gather from this allusion to a band--a speckled
     band?"

     "Sometimes I have thought that it was merely the wild talk of
     delirium, sometimes that it may have referred to some band of people,
     perhaps to these very gipsies in the plantation. I do not know
     whether the spotted handkerchiefs which so many of them wear over
     their heads might have suggested the strange adjective which she
     used."

     Holmes shook his head like a man who is far from being satisfied.

     "These are very deep waters," said he; "pray go on with your
     narrative."

     "Two years have passed since then, and my life has been until lately
     lonelier than ever. A month ago, however, a dear friend, whom I have
     known for many years, has done me the honour to ask my hand in
     marriage. His name is Armitage--Percy Armitage--the second son of Mr.
     Armitage, of Crane Water, near Reading. My stepfather has offered no
     opposition to the match, and we are to be married in the course of
     the spring. Two days ago some repairs were started in the west wing
     of the building, and my bedroom wall has been pierced, so that I have
     had to move into the chamber in which my sister died, and to sleep in
     the very bed in which she slept. Imagine, then, my thrill of terror
     when last night, as I lay awake, thinking over her terrible fate, I
     suddenly heard in the silence of the night the low whistle which had
     been the herald of her own death. I sprang up and lit the lamp, but
     nothing was to be seen in the room. I was too shaken to go to bed
     again, however, so I dressed, and as soon as it was daylight I
     slipped down, got a dog-cart at the Crown Inn, which is opposite, and
     drove to Leatherhead, from whence I have come on this morning with
     the one object of seeing you and asking your advice."

     "You have done wisely," said my friend. "But have you told me all?"

     "Yes, all."

     "Miss Roylott, you have not. You are screening your stepfather."

     "Why, what do you mean?"

     For answer Holmes pushed back the frill of black lace which fringed
     the hand that lay upon our visitor's knee. Five little livid spots,
     the marks of four fingers and a thumb, were printed upon the white
     wrist.

     "You have been cruelly used," said Holmes.

     The lady coloured deeply and covered over her injured wrist. "He is a
     hard man," she said, "and perhaps he hardly knows his own strength."

     There was a long silence, during which Holmes leaned his chin upon
     his hands and stared into the crackling fire.

     "This is a very deep business," he said at last. "There are a
     thousand details which I should desire to know before I decide upon
     our course of action. Yet we have not a moment to lose. If we were to
     come to Stoke Moran to-day, would it be possible for us to see over
     these rooms without the knowledge of your stepfather?"

     "As it happens, he spoke of coming into town to-day upon some most
     important business. It is probable that he will be away all day, and
     that there would be nothing to disturb you. We have a housekeeper
     now, but she is old and foolish, and I could easily get her out of
     the way."

     "Excellent. You are not averse to this trip, Watson?"

     "By no means."

     "Then we shall both come. What are you going to do yourself?"

     "I have one or two things which I would wish to do now that I am in
     town. But I shall return by the twelve o'clock train, so as to be
     there in time for your coming."

     "And you may expect us early in the afternoon. I have myself some
     small business matters to attend to. Will you not wait and
     breakfast?"

     "No, I must go. My heart is lightened already since I have confided
     my trouble to you. I shall look forward to seeing you again this
     afternoon." She dropped her thick black veil over her face and glided
     from the room.

     "And what do you think of it all, Watson?" asked Sherlock Holmes,
     leaning back in his chair.

     "It seems to me to be a most dark and sinister business."

     "Dark enough and sinister enough."

     "Yet if the lady is correct in saying that the flooring and walls are
     sound, and that the door, window, and chimney are impassable, then
     her sister must have been undoubtedly alone when she met her
     mysterious end."

     "What becomes, then, of these nocturnal whistles, and what of the
     very peculiar words of the dying woman?"

     "I cannot think."

     "When you combine the ideas of whistles at night, the presence of a
     band of gipsies who are on intimate terms with this old doctor, the
     fact that we have every reason to believe that the doctor has an
     interest in preventing his stepdaughter's marriage, the dying
     allusion to a band, and, finally, the fact that Miss Helen Stoner
     heard a metallic clang, which might have been caused by one of those
     metal bars that secured the shutters falling back into its place, I
     think that there is good ground to think that the mystery may be
     cleared along those lines."

     "But what, then, did the gipsies do?"

     "I cannot imagine."

     "I see many objections to any such theory."

     "And so do I. It is precisely for that reason that we are going to
     Stoke Moran this day. I want to see whether the objections are fatal,
     or if they may be explained away. But what in the name of the devil!"

     The ejaculation had been drawn from my companion by the fact that our
     door had been suddenly dashed open, and that a huge man had framed
     himself in the aperture. His costume was a peculiar mixture of the
     professional and of the agricultural, having a black top-hat, a long
     frock-coat, and a pair of high gaiters, with a hunting-crop swinging
     in his hand. So tall was he that his hat actually brushed the cross
     bar of the doorway, and his breadth seemed to span it across from
     side to side. A large face, seared with a thousand wrinkles, burned
     yellow with the sun, and marked with every evil passion, was turned
     from one to the other of us, while his deep-set, bile-shot eyes, and
     his high, thin, fleshless nose, gave him somewhat the resemblance to
     a fierce old bird of prey.

     "Which of you is Holmes?" asked this apparition.

     "My name, sir; but you have the advantage of me," said my companion
     quietly.

     "I am Dr. Grimesby Roylott, of Stoke Moran."

     "Indeed, Doctor," said Holmes blandly. "Pray take a seat."

     "I will do nothing of the kind. My stepdaughter has been here. I have
     traced her. What has she been saying to you?"

     "It is a little cold for the time of the year," said Holmes.

     "What has she been saying to you?" screamed the old man furiously.

     "But I have heard that the crocuses promise well," continued my
     companion imperturbably.

     "Ha! You put me off, do you?" said our new visitor, taking a step
     forward and shaking his hunting-crop. "I know you, you scoundrel!  I
     have heard of you before. You are Holmes, the meddler."

     My friend smiled.

     "Holmes, the busybody!"

     His smile broadened.

     "Holmes, the Scotland Yard Jack-in-office!"

     Holmes chuckled heartily. "Your conversation is most entertaining,"
     said he. "When you go out close the door, for there is a decided
     draught."

     "I will go when I have said my say. Don't you dare to meddle with my
     affairs. I know that Miss Stoner has been here. I traced her! I am a
     dangerous man to fall foul of! See here." He stepped swiftly forward,
     seized the poker, and bent it into a curve with his huge brown hands.

     "See that you keep yourself out of my grip," he snarled, and hurling
     the twisted poker into the fireplace he strode out of the room.

     "He seems a very amiable person," said Holmes, laughing. "I am not
     quite so bulky, but if he had remained I might have shown him that my
     grip was not much more feeble than his own." As he spoke he picked up
     the steel poker and, with a sudden effort, straightened it out again.

     "Fancy his having the insolence to confound me with the official
     detective force! This incident gives zest to our investigation,
     however, and I only trust that our little friend will not suffer from
     her imprudence in allowing this brute to trace her. And now, Watson,
     we shall order breakfast, and afterwards I shall walk down to
     Doctors' Commons, where I hope to get some data which may help us in
     this matter."

     It was nearly one o'clock when Sherlock Holmes returned from his
     excursion. He held in his hand a sheet of blue paper, scrawled over
     with notes and figures.

     "I have seen the will of the deceased wife," said he. "To determine
     its exact meaning I have been obliged to work out the present prices
     of the investments with which it is concerned. The total income,
     which at the time of the wife's death was little short of ?100, is
     now, through the fall in agricultural prices, not more than ?50.
     Each daughter can claim an income of ?50, in case of marriage. It is
     evident, therefore, that if both girls had married, this beauty would
     have had a mere pittance, while even one of them would cripple him to
     a very serious extent. My morning's work has not been wasted, since
     it has proved that he has the very strongest motives for standing in
     the way of anything of the sort. And now, Watson, this is too serious
     for dawdling, especially as the old man is aware that we are
     interesting ourselves in his affairs; so if you are ready, we shall
     call a cab and drive to Waterloo. I should be very much obliged if
     you would slip your revolver into your pocket. An Eley's No. 2 is an
     excellent argument with gentlemen who can twist steel pokers into
     knots. That and a tooth-brush are, I think, all that we need."

     At Waterloo we were fortunate in catching a train for Leatherhead,
     where we hired a trap at the station inn and drove for four or five
     miles through the lovely Surrey lanes. It was a perfect day, with a
     bright sun and a few fleecy clouds in the heavens. The trees and
     wayside hedges were just throwing out their first green shoots, and
     the air was full of the pleasant smell of the moist earth. To me at
     least there was a strange contrast between the sweet promise of the
     spring and this sinister quest upon which we were engaged. My
     companion sat in the front of the trap, his arms folded, his hat
     pulled down over his eyes, and his chin sunk upon his breast, buried
     in the deepest thought. Suddenly, however, he started, tapped me on
     the shoulder, and pointed over the meadows.

     "Look there!" said he.

     A heavily timbered park stretched up in a gentle slope, thickening
     into a grove at the highest point. From amid the branches there
     jutted out the grey gables and high roof-tree of a very old mansion.

     "Stoke Moran?" said he.

     "Yes, sir, that be the house of Dr. Grimesby Roylott," remarked the
     driver.

     "There is some building going on there," said Holmes; "that is where
     we are going."

     "There's the village," said the driver, pointing to a cluster of
     roofs some distance to the left; "but if you want to get to the
     house, you'll find it shorter to get over this stile, and so by the
     foot-path over the fields. There it is, where the lady is walking."

     "And the lady, I fancy, is Miss Stoner," observed Holmes, shading his
     eyes. "Yes, I think we had better do as you suggest."

     We got off, paid our fare, and the trap rattled back on its way to
     Leatherhead.

     "I thought it as well," said Holmes as we climbed the stile, "that
     this fellow should think we had come here as architects, or on some
     definite business. It may stop his gossip. Good-afternoon, Miss
     Stoner. You see that we have been as good as our word."

     Our client of the morning had hurried forward to meet us with a face
     which spoke her joy. "I have been waiting so eagerly for you," she
     cried, shaking hands with us warmly. "All has turned out splendidly.
     Dr. Roylott has gone to town, and it is unlikely that he will be back
     before evening."

     "We have had the pleasure of making the doctor's acquaintance," said
     Holmes, and in a few words he sketched out what had occurred. Miss
     Stoner turned white to the lips as she listened.

     "Good heavens!" she cried, "he has followed me, then."

     "So it appears."

     "He is so cunning that I never know when I am safe from him. What
     will he say when he returns?"

     "He must guard himself, for he may find that there is someone more
     cunning than himself upon his track. You must lock yourself up from
     him to-night. If he is violent, we shall take you away to your aunt's
     at Harrow. Now, we must make the best use of our time, so kindly take
     us at once to the rooms which we are to examine."

     The building was of grey, lichen-blotched stone, with a high central
     portion and two curving wings, like the claws of a crab, thrown out
     on each side. In one of these wings the windows were broken and
     blocked with wooden boards, while the roof was partly caved in, a
     picture of ruin. The central portion was in little better repair, but
     the right-hand block was comparatively modern, and the blinds in the
     windows, with the blue smoke curling up from the chimneys, showed
     that this was where the family resided. Some scaffolding had been
     erected against the end wall, and the stone-work had been broken
     into, but there were no signs of any workmen at the moment of our
     visit. Holmes walked slowly up and down the ill-trimmed lawn and
     examined with deep attention the outsides of the windows.

     "This, I take it, belongs to the room in which you used to sleep, the
     centre one to your sister's, and the one next to the main building to
     Dr. Roylott's chamber?"

     "Exactly so. But I am now sleeping in the middle one."

     "Pending the alterations, as I understand. By the way, there does not
     seem to be any very pressing need for repairs at that end wall."

     "There were none. I believe that it was an excuse to move me from my
     room."

     "Ah! that is suggestive. Now, on the other side of this narrow wing
     runs the corridor from which these three rooms open. There are
     windows in it, of course?"

     "Yes, but very small ones. Too narrow for anyone to pass through."

     "As you both locked your doors at night, your rooms were
     unapproachable from that side. Now, would you have the kindness to go
     into your room and bar your shutters?"

     Miss Stoner did so, and Holmes, after a careful examination through
     the open window, endeavoured in every way to force the shutter open,
     but without success. There was no slit through which a knife could be
     passed to raise the bar. Then with his lens he tested the hinges, but
     they were of solid iron, built firmly into the massive masonry.
     "Hum!" said he, scratching his chin in some perplexity, "my theory
     certainly presents some difficulties. No one could pass these
     shutters if they were bolted. Well, we shall see if the inside throws
     any light upon the matter."

     A small side door led into the whitewashed corridor from which the
     three bedrooms opened. Holmes refused to examine the third chamber,
     so we passed at once to the second, that in which Miss Stoner was now
     sleeping, and in which her sister had met with her fate. It was a
     homely little room, with a low ceiling and a gaping fireplace, after
     the fashion of old country-houses. A brown chest of drawers stood in
     one corner, a narrow white-counterpaned bed in another, and a
     dressing-table on the left-hand side of the window. These articles,
     with two small wicker-work chairs, made up all the furniture in the
     room save for a square of Wilton carpet in the centre. The boards
     round and the panelling of the walls were of brown, worm-eaten oak,
     so old and discoloured that it may have dated from the original
     building of the house. Holmes drew one of the chairs into a corner
     and sat silent, while his eyes travelled round and round and up and
     down, taking in every detail of the apartment.

     "Where does that bell communicate with?" he asked at last pointing to
     a thick bell-rope which hung down beside the bed, the tassel actually
     lying upon the pillow.

     "It goes to the housekeeper's room."

     "It looks newer than the other things?"

     "Yes, it was only put there a couple of years ago."

     "Your sister asked for it, I suppose?"

     "No, I never heard of her using it. We used always to get what we
     wanted for ourselves."

     "Indeed, it seemed unnecessary to put so nice a bell-pull there. You
     will excuse me for a few minutes while I satisfy myself as to this
     floor." He threw himself down upon his face with his lens in his hand
     and crawled swiftly backward and forward, examining minutely the
     cracks between the boards. Then he did the same with the wood-work
     with which the chamber was panelled. Finally he walked over to the
     bed and spent some time in staring at it and in running his eye up
     and down the wall. Finally he took the bell-rope in his hand and gave
     it a brisk tug.

     "Why, it's a dummy," said he.

     "Won't it ring?"

     "No, it is not even attached to a wire. This is very interesting. You
     can see now that it is fastened to a hook just above where the little
     opening for the ventilator is."

     "How very absurd! I never noticed that before."

     "Very strange!" muttered Holmes, pulling at the rope. "There are one
     or two very singular points about this room. For example, what a fool
     a builder must be to open a ventilator into another room, when, with
     the same trouble, he might have communicated with the outside air!"

     "That is also quite modern," said the lady.

     "Done about the same time as the bell-rope?" remarked Holmes.

     "Yes, there were several little changes carried out about that time."

     "They seem to have been of a most interesting character--dummy
     bell-ropes, and ventilators which do not ventilate. With your
     permission, Miss Stoner, we shall now carry our researches into the
     inner apartment."

     Dr. Grimesby Roylott's chamber was larger than that of his
     step-daughter, but was as plainly furnished. A camp-bed, a small
     wooden shelf full of books, mostly of a technical character, an
     armchair beside the bed, a plain wooden chair against the wall, a
     round table, and a large iron safe were the principal things which
     met the eye. Holmes walked slowly round and examined each and all of
     them with the keenest interest.

     "What's in here?" he asked, tapping the safe.

     "My stepfather's business papers."

     "Oh! you have seen inside, then?"

     "Only once, some years ago. I remember that it was full of papers."

     "There isn't a cat in it, for example?"

     "No. What a strange idea!"

     "Well, look at this!" He took up a small saucer of milk which stood
     on the top of it.

     "No; we don't keep a cat. But there is a cheetah and a baboon."

     "Ah, yes, of course! Well, a cheetah is just a big cat, and yet a
     saucer of milk does not go very far in satisfying its wants, I
     daresay. There is one point which I should wish to determine." He
     squatted down in front of the wooden chair and examined the seat of
     it with the greatest attention.

     "Thank you. That is quite settled," said he, rising and putting his
     lens in his pocket. "Hullo! Here is something interesting!"

     The object which had caught his eye was a small dog lash hung on one
     corner of the bed. The lash, however, was curled upon itself and tied
     so as to make a loop of whipcord.

     "What do you make of that, Watson?"

     "It's a common enough lash. But I don't know why it should be tied."

     "That is not quite so common, is it? Ah, me! it's a wicked world, and
     when a clever man turns his brains to crime it is the worst of all. I
     think that I have seen enough now, Miss Stoner, and with your
     permission we shall walk out upon the lawn."

     I had never seen my friend's face so grim or his brow so dark as it
     was when we turned from the scene of this investigation. We had
     walked several times up and down the lawn, neither Miss Stoner nor
     myself liking to break in upon his thoughts before he roused himself
     from his reverie.

     "It is very essential, Miss Stoner," said he, "that you should
     absolutely follow my advice in every respect."

     "I shall most certainly do so."

     "The matter is too serious for any hesitation. Your life may depend
     upon your compliance."

     "I assure you that I am in your hands."

     "In the first place, both my friend and I must spend the night in
     your room."

     Both Miss Stoner and I gazed at him in astonishment.

     "Yes, it must be so. Let me explain. I believe that that is the
     village inn over there?"

     "Yes, that is the Crown."

     "Very good. Your windows would be visible from there?"

     "Certainly."

     "You must confine yourself to your room, on pretence of a headache,
     when your stepfather comes back. Then when you hear him retire for
     the night, you must open the shutters of your window, undo the hasp,
     put your lamp there as a signal to us, and then withdraw quietly with
     everything which you are likely to want into the room which you used
     to occupy. I have no doubt that, in spite of the repairs, you could
     manage there for one night."

     "Oh, yes, easily."

     "The rest you will leave in our hands."

     "But what will you do?"

     "We shall spend the night in your room, and we shall investigate the
     cause of this noise which has disturbed you."

     "I believe, Mr. Holmes, that you have already made up your mind,"
     said Miss Stoner, laying her hand upon my companion's sleeve.

     "Perhaps I have."

     "Then, for pity's sake, tell me what was the cause of my sister's
     death."

     "I should prefer to have clearer proofs before I speak."

     "You can at least tell me whether my own thought is correct, and if
     she died from some sudden fright."

     "No, I do not think so. I think that there was probably some more
     tangible cause. And now, Miss Stoner, we must leave you for if Dr.
     Roylott returned and saw us our journey would be in vain.  Good-bye,
     and be brave, for if you will do what I have told you, you may rest
     assured that we shall soon drive away the dangers that threaten you."

     Sherlock Holmes and I had no difficulty in engaging a bedroom and
     sitting-room at the Crown Inn. They were on the upper floor, and from
     our window we could command a view of the avenue gate, and of the
     inhabited wing of Stoke Moran Manor House. At dusk we saw Dr.
     Grimesby Roylott drive past, his huge form looming up beside the
     little figure of the lad who drove him. The boy had some slight
     difficulty in undoing the heavy iron gates, and we heard the hoarse
     roar of the doctor's voice and saw the fury with which he shook his
     clinched fists at him. The trap drove on, and a few minutes later we
     saw a sudden light spring up among the trees as the lamp was lit in
     one of the sitting-rooms.

     "Do you know, Watson," said Holmes as we sat together in the
     gathering darkness, "I have really some scruples as to taking you
     to-night. There is a distinct element of danger."

     "Can I be of assistance?"

     "Your presence might be invaluable."

     "Then I shall certainly come."

     "It is very kind of you."

     "You speak of danger. You have evidently seen more in these rooms
     than was visible to me."

     "No, but I fancy that I may have deduced a little more. I imagine
     that you saw all that I did."

     "I saw nothing remarkable save the bell-rope, and what purpose that
     could answer I confess is more than I can imagine."

     "You saw the ventilator, too?"

     "Yes, but I do not think that it is such a very unusual thing to have
     a small opening between two rooms. It was so small that a rat could
     hardly pass through."

     "I knew that we should find a ventilator before ever we came to Stoke
     Moran."

     "My dear Holmes!"

     "Oh, yes, I did. You remember in her statement she said that her
     sister could smell Dr. Roylott's cigar. Now, of course that suggested
     at once that there must be a communication between the two rooms. It
     could only be a small one, or it would have been remarked upon at the
     coroner's inquiry. I deduced a ventilator."

     "But what harm can there be in that?"

     "Well, there is at least a curious coincidence of dates. A ventilator
     is made, a cord is hung, and a lady who sleeps in the bed dies. Does
     not that strike you?"

     "I cannot as yet see any connection."

     "Did you observe anything very peculiar about that bed?"

     "No."

     "It was clamped to the floor. Did you ever see a bed fastened like
     that before?"

     "I cannot say that I have."

     "The lady could not move her bed. It must always be in the same
     relative position to the ventilator and to the rope--or so we may
     call it, since it was clearly never meant for a bell-pull."

     "Holmes," I cried, "I seem to see dimly what you are hinting at. We
     are only just in time to prevent some subtle and horrible crime."

     "Subtle enough and horrible enough. When a doctor does go wrong he is
     the first of criminals. He has nerve and he has knowledge. Palmer and
     Pritchard were among the heads of their profession. This man strikes
     even deeper, but I think, Watson, that we shall be able to strike
     deeper still. But we shall have horrors enough before the night is
     over; for goodness' sake let us have a quiet pipe and turn our minds
     for a few hours to something more cheerful."

     About nine o'clock the light among the trees was extinguished, and
     all was dark in the direction of the Manor House. Two hours passed
     slowly away, and then, suddenly, just at the stroke of eleven, a
     single bright light shone out right in front of us.

     "That is our signal," said Holmes, springing to his feet; "it comes
     from the middle window."

     As we passed out he exchanged a few words with the landlord,
     explaining that we were going on a late visit to an acquaintance, and
     that it was possible that we might spend the night there. A moment
     later we were out on the dark road, a chill wind blowing in our
     faces, and one yellow light twinkling in front of us through the
     gloom to guide us on our sombre errand.

     There was little difficulty in entering the grounds, for unrepaired
     breaches gaped in the old park wall. Making our way among the trees,
     we reached the lawn, crossed it, and were about to enter through the
     window when out from a clump of laurel bushes there darted what
     seemed to be a hideous and distorted child, who threw itself upon the
     grass with writhing limbs and then ran swiftly across the lawn into
     the darkness.

     "My God!" I whispered; "did you see it?"

     Holmes was for the moment as startled as I. His hand closed like a
     vice upon my wrist in his agitation. Then he broke into a low laugh
     and put his lips to my ear.

     "It is a nice household," he murmured. "That is the baboon."

     I had forgotten the strange pets which the doctor affected. There was
     a cheetah, too; perhaps we might find it upon our shoulders at any
     moment. I confess that I felt easier in my mind when, after following
     Holmes' example and slipping off my shoes, I found myself inside the
     bedroom. My companion noiselessly closed the shutters, moved the lamp
     onto the table, and cast his eyes round the room. All was as we had
     seen it in the daytime. Then creeping up to me and making a trumpet
     of his hand, he whispered into my ear again so gently that it was all
     that I could do to distinguish the words:

     "The least sound would be fatal to our plans."

     I nodded to show that I had heard.

     "We must sit without light. He would see it through the ventilator."

     I nodded again.

     "Do not go asleep; your very life may depend upon it. Have your
     pistol ready in case we should need it. I will sit on the side of the
     bed, and you in that chair."

     I took out my revolver and laid it on the corner of the table.

     Holmes had brought up a long thin cane, and this he placed upon the
     bed beside him. By it he laid the box of matches and the stump of a
     candle. Then he turned down the lamp, and we were left in darkness.

     How shall I ever forget that dreadful vigil? I could not hear a
     sound, not even the drawing of a breath, and yet I knew that my
     companion sat open-eyed, within a few feet of me, in the same state
     of nervous tension in which I was myself. The shutters cut off the
     least ray of light, and we waited in absolute darkness.

     From outside came the occasional cry of a night-bird, and once at our
     very window a long drawn catlike whine, which told us that the
     cheetah was indeed at liberty. Far away we could hear the deep tones
     of the parish clock, which boomed out every quarter of an hour. How
     long they seemed, those quarters! Twelve struck, and one and two and
     three, and still we sat waiting silently for whatever might befall.

     Suddenly there was the momentary gleam of a light up in the direction
     of the ventilator, which vanished immediately, but was succeeded by a
     strong smell of burning oil and heated metal. Someone in the next
     room had lit a dark-lantern. I heard a gentle sound of movement, and
     then all was silent once more, though the smell grew stronger. For
     half an hour I sat with straining ears. Then suddenly another sound
     became audible--a very gentle, soothing sound, like that of a small
     jet of steam escaping continually from a kettle. The instant that we
     heard it, Holmes sprang from the bed, struck a match, and lashed
     furiously with his cane at the bell-pull.

     "You see it, Watson?" he yelled. "You see it?"

     But I saw nothing. At the moment when Holmes struck the light I heard
     a low, clear whistle, but the sudden glare flashing into my weary
     eyes made it impossible for me to tell what it was at which my friend
     lashed so savagely. I could, however, see that his face was deadly
     pale and filled with horror and loathing. He had ceased to strike and
     was gazing up at the ventilator when suddenly there broke from the
     silence of the night the most horrible cry to which I have ever
     listened. It swelled up louder and louder, a hoarse yell of pain and
     fear and anger all mingled in the one dreadful shriek. They say that
     away down in the village, and even in the distant parsonage, that cry
     raised the sleepers from their beds. It struck cold to our hearts,
     and I stood gazing at Holmes, and he at me, until the last echoes of
     it had died away into the silence from which it rose.

     "What can it mean?" I gasped.

     "It means that it is all over," Holmes answered. "And perhaps, after
     all, it is for the best. Take your pistol, and we will enter Dr.
     Roylott's room."

     With a grave face he lit the lamp and led the way down the corridor.
     Twice he struck at the chamber door without any reply from within.
     Then he turned the handle and entered, I at his heels, with the
     cocked pistol in my hand.

     It was a singular sight which met our eyes. On the table stood a
     dark-lantern with the shutter half open, throwing a brilliant beam of
     light upon the iron safe, the door of which was ajar. Beside this
     table, on the wooden chair, sat Dr. Grimesby Roylott clad in a long
     grey dressing-gown, his bare ankles protruding beneath, and his feet
     thrust into red heelless Turkish slippers. Across his lap lay the
     short stock with the long lash which we had noticed during the day.
     His chin was cocked upward and his eyes were fixed in a dreadful,
     rigid stare at the corner of the ceiling. Round his brow he had a
     peculiar yellow band, with brownish speckles, which seemed to be
     bound tightly round his head. As we entered he made neither sound nor
     motion.

     "The band! the speckled band!" whispered Holmes.

     I took a step forward. In an instant his strange headgear began to
     move, and there reared itself from among his hair the squat
     diamond-shaped head and puffed neck of a loathsome serpent.

     "It is a swamp adder!" cried Holmes; "the deadliest snake in India.
     He has died within ten seconds of being bitten. Violence does, in
     truth, recoil upon the violent, and the schemer falls into the pit
     which he digs for another. Let us thrust this creature back into its
     den, and we can then remove Miss Stoner to some place of shelter and
     let the county police know what has happened."

     As he spoke he drew the dog-whip swiftly from the dead man's lap, and
     throwing the noose round the reptile's neck he drew it from its
     horrid perch and, carrying it at arm's length, threw it into the iron
     safe, which he closed upon it.

     Such are the true facts of the death of Dr. Grimesby Roylott, of
     Stoke Moran. It is not necessary that I should prolong a narrative
     which has already run to too great a length by telling how we broke
     the sad news to the terrified girl, how we conveyed her by the
     morning train to the care of her good aunt at Harrow, of how the slow
     process of official inquiry came to the conclusion that the doctor
     met his fate while indiscreetly playing with a dangerous pet. The
     little which I had yet to learn of the case was told me by Sherlock
     Holmes as we travelled back next day.

     "I had," said he, "come to an entirely erroneous conclusion which
     shows, my dear Watson, how dangerous it always is to reason from
     insufficient data. The presence of the gipsies, and the use of the
     word 'band,' which was used by the poor girl, no doubt, to explain
     the appearance which she had caught a hurried glimpse of by the light
     of her match, were sufficient to put me upon an entirely wrong scent.
     I can only claim the merit that I instantly reconsidered my position
     when, however, it became clear to me that whatever danger threatened
     an occupant of the room could not come either from the window or the
     door. My attention was speedily drawn, as I have already remarked to
     you, to this ventilator, and to the bell-rope which hung down to the
     bed. The discovery that this was a dummy, and that the bed was
     clamped to the floor, instantly gave rise to the suspicion that the
     rope was there as a bridge for something passing through the hole and
     coming to the bed. The idea of a snake instantly occurred to me, and
     when I coupled it with my knowledge that the doctor was furnished
     with a supply of creatures from India, I felt that I was probably on
     the right track. The idea of using a form of poison which could not
     possibly be discovered by any chemical test was just such a one as
     would occur to a clever and ruthless man who had had an Eastern
     training. The rapidity with which such a poison would take effect
     would also, from his point of view, be an advantage. It would be a
     sharp-eyed coroner, indeed, who could distinguish the two little dark
     punctures which would show where the poison fangs had done their
     work. Then I thought of the whistle. Of course he must recall the
     snake before the morning light revealed it to the victim. He had
     trained it, probably by the use of the milk which we saw, to return
     to him when summoned. He would put it through this ventilator at the
     hour that he thought best, with the certainty that it would crawl
     down the rope and land on the bed. It might or might not bite the
     occupant, perhaps she might escape every night for a week, but sooner
     or later she must fall a victim.

     "I had come to these conclusions before ever I had entered his room.
     An inspection of his chair showed me that he had been in the habit of
     standing on it, which of course would be necessary in order that he
     should reach the ventilator. The sight of the safe, the saucer of
     milk, and the loop of whipcord were enough to finally dispel any
     doubts which may have remained. The metallic clang heard by Miss
     Stoner was obviously caused by her stepfather hastily closing the
     door of his safe upon its terrible occupant. Having once made up my
     mind, you know the steps which I took in order to put the matter to
     the proof. I heard the creature hiss as I have no doubt that you did
     also, and I instantly lit the light and attacked it."

     "With the result of driving it through the ventilator."

     "And also with the result of causing it to turn upon its master at
     the other side. Some of the blows of my cane came home and roused its
     snakish temper, so that it flew upon the first person it saw. In this
     way I am no doubt indirectly responsible for Dr. Grimesby Roylott's
     death, and I cannot say that it is likely to weigh very heavily upon
     my conscience."






                      THE ADVENTURE OF THE ENGINEER'S THUMB

     Of all the problems which have been submitted to my friend, Mr.
     Sherlock Holmes, for solution during the years of our intimacy, there
     were only two which I was the means of introducing to his
     notice--that of Mr. Hatherley's thumb, and that of Colonel
     Warburton's madness. Of these the latter may have afforded a finer
     field for an acute and original observer, but the other was so
     strange in its inception and so dramatic in its details that it may
     be the more worthy of being placed upon record, even if it gave my
     friend fewer openings for those deductive methods of reasoning by
     which he achieved such remarkable results. The story has, I believe,
     been told more than once in the newspapers, but, like all such
     narratives, its effect is much less striking when set forth en bloc
     in a single half-column of print than when the facts slowly evolve
     before your own eyes, and the mystery clears gradually away as each
     new discovery furnishes a step which leads on to the complete truth.
     At the time the circumstances made a deep impression upon me, and the
     lapse of two years has hardly served to weaken the effect.

     It was in the summer of '89, not long after my marriage, that the
     events occurred which I am now about to summarise. I had returned to
     civil practice and had finally abandoned Holmes in his Baker Street
     rooms, although I continually visited him and occasionally even
     persuaded him to forgo his Bohemian habits so far as to come and
     visit us. My practice had steadily increased, and as I happened to
     live at no very great distance from Paddington Station, I got a few
     patients from among the officials. One of these, whom I had cured of
     a painful and lingering disease, was never weary of advertising my
     virtues and of endeavouring to send me on every sufferer over whom he
     might have any influence.

     One morning, at a little before seven o'clock, I was awakened by the
     maid tapping at the door to announce that two men had come from
     Paddington and were waiting in the consulting-room. I dressed
     hurriedly, for I knew by experience that railway cases were seldom
     trivial, and hastened downstairs. As I descended, my old ally, the
     guard, came out of the room and closed the door tightly behind him.

     "I've got him here," he whispered, jerking his thumb over his
     shoulder; "he's all right."

     "What is it, then?" I asked, for his manner suggested that it was
     some strange creature which he had caged up in my room.

     "It's a new patient," he whispered. "I thought I'd bring him round
     myself; then he couldn't slip away. There he is, all safe and sound.
     I must go now, Doctor; I have my dooties, just the same as you." And
     off he went, this trusty tout, without even giving me time to thank
     him.

     I entered my consulting-room and found a gentleman seated by the
     table. He was quietly dressed in a suit of heather tweed with a soft
     cloth cap which he had laid down upon my books. Round one of his
     hands he had a handkerchief wrapped, which was mottled all over with
     bloodstains. He was young, not more than five-and-twenty, I should
     say, with a strong, masculine face; but he was exceedingly pale and
     gave me the impression of a man who was suffering from some strong
     agitation, which it took all his strength of mind to control.

     "I am sorry to knock you up so early, Doctor," said he, "but I have
     had a very serious accident during the night. I came in by train this
     morning, and on inquiring at Paddington as to where I might find a
     doctor, a worthy fellow very kindly escorted me here. I gave the maid
     a card, but I see that she has left it upon the side-table."

     I took it up and glanced at it. "Mr. Victor Hatherley, hydraulic
     engineer, 16A, Victoria Street (3rd floor)." That was the name,
     style, and abode of my morning visitor. "I regret that I have kept
     you waiting," said I, sitting down in my library-chair. "You are
     fresh from a night journey, I understand, which is in itself a
     monotonous occupation."

     "Oh, my night could not be called monotonous," said he, and laughed.
     He laughed very heartily, with a high, ringing note, leaning back in
     his chair and shaking his sides. All my medical instincts rose up
     against that laugh.

     "Stop it!" I cried; "pull yourself together!" and I poured out some
     water from a caraffe.

     It was useless, however. He was off in one of those hysterical
     outbursts which come upon a strong nature when some great crisis is
     over and gone. Presently he came to himself once more, very weary and
     pale-looking.

     "I have been making a fool of myself," he gasped.

     "Not at all. Drink this." I dashed some brandy into the water, and
     the colour began to come back to his bloodless cheeks.

     "That's better!" said he. "And now, Doctor, perhaps you would kindly
     attend to my thumb, or rather to the place where my thumb used to
     be."

     He unwound the handkerchief and held out his hand. It gave even my
     hardened nerves a shudder to look at it. There were four protruding
     fingers and a horrid red, spongy surface where the thumb should have
     been. It had been hacked or torn right out from the roots.

     "Good heavens!" I cried, "this is a terrible injury. It must have
     bled considerably."

     "Yes, it did. I fainted when it was done, and I think that I must
     have been senseless for a long time. When I came to I found that it
     was still bleeding, so I tied one end of my handkerchief very tightly
     round the wrist and braced it up with a twig."

     "Excellent! You should have been a surgeon."

     "It is a question of hydraulics, you see, and came within my own
     province."

     "This has been done," said I, examining the wound, "by a very heavy
     and sharp instrument."

     "A thing like a cleaver," said he.

     "An accident, I presume?"

     "By no means."

     "What! a murderous attack?"

     "Very murderous indeed."

     "You horrify me."

     I sponged the wound, cleaned it, dressed it, and finally covered it
     over with cotton wadding and carbolised bandages. He lay back without
     wincing, though he bit his lip from time to time.

     "How is that?" I asked when I had finished.

     "Capital! Between your brandy and your bandage, I feel a new man. I
     was very weak, but I have had a good deal to go through."

     "Perhaps you had better not speak of the matter. It is evidently
     trying to your nerves."

     "Oh, no, not now. I shall have to tell my tale to the police; but,
     between ourselves, if it were not for the convincing evidence of this
     wound of mine, I should be surprised if they believed my statement,
     for it is a very extraordinary one, and I have not much in the way of
     proof with which to back it up; and, even if they believe me, the
     clues which I can give them are so vague that it is a question
     whether justice will be done."

     "Ha!" cried I, "if it is anything in the nature of a problem which
     you desire to see solved, I should strongly recommend you to come to
     my friend, Mr. Sherlock Holmes, before you go to the official
     police."

     "Oh, I have heard of that fellow," answered my visitor, "and I should
     be very glad if he would take the matter up, though of course I must
     use the official police as well. Would you give me an introduction to
     him?"

     "I'll do better. I'll take you round to him myself."

     "I should be immensely obliged to you."

     "We'll call a cab and go together. We shall just be in time to have a
     little breakfast with him. Do you feel equal to it?"

     "Yes; I shall not feel easy until I have told my story."

     "Then my servant will call a cab, and I shall be with you in an
     instant." I rushed upstairs, explained the matter shortly to my wife,
     and in five minutes was inside a hansom, driving with my new
     acquaintance to Baker Street.

     Sherlock Holmes was, as I expected, lounging about his sitting-room
     in his dressing-gown, reading the agony column of The Times and
     smoking his before-breakfast pipe, which was composed of all the
     plugs and dottles left from his smokes of the day before, all
     carefully dried and collected on the corner of the mantelpiece. He
     received us in his quietly genial fashion, ordered fresh rashers and
     eggs, and joined us in a hearty meal. When it was concluded he
     settled our new acquaintance upon the sofa, placed a pillow beneath
     his head, and laid a glass of brandy and water within his reach.

     "It is easy to see that your experience has been no common one, Mr.
     Hatherley," said he. "Pray, lie down there and make yourself
     absolutely at home. Tell us what you can, but stop when you are tired
     and keep up your strength with a little stimulant."

     "Thank you," said my patient. "but I have felt another man since the
     doctor bandaged me, and I think that your breakfast has completed the
     cure. I shall take up as little of your valuable time as possible, so
     I shall start at once upon my peculiar experiences."

     Holmes sat in his big armchair with the weary, heavy-lidded
     expression which veiled his keen and eager nature, while I sat
     opposite to him, and we listened in silence to the strange story
     which our visitor detailed to us.

     "You must know," said he, "that I am an orphan and a bachelor,
     residing alone in lodgings in London. By profession I am a hydraulic
     engineer, and I have had considerable experience of my work during
     the seven years that I was apprenticed to Venner & Matheson, the
     well-known firm, of Greenwich. Two years ago, having served my time,
     and having also come into a fair sum of money through my poor
     father's death, I determined to start in business for myself and took
     professional chambers in Victoria Street.

     "I suppose that everyone finds his first independent start in
     business a dreary experience. To me it has been exceptionally so.
     During two years I have had three consultations and one small job,
     and that is absolutely all that my profession has brought me. My
     gross takings amount to ?7 10s. Every day, from nine in the morning
     until four in the afternoon, I waited in my little den, until at last
     my heart began to sink, and I came to believe that I should never
     have any practice at all.

     "Yesterday, however, just as I was thinking of leaving the office, my
     clerk entered to say there was a gentleman waiting who wished to see
     me upon business. He brought up a card, too, with the name of
     'Colonel Lysander Stark' engraved upon it. Close at his heels came
     the colonel himself, a man rather over the middle size, but of an
     exceeding thinness. I do not think that I have ever seen so thin a
     man. His whole face sharpened away into nose and chin, and the skin
     of his cheeks was drawn quite tense over his outstanding bones. Yet
     this emaciation seemed to be his natural habit, and due to no
     disease, for his eye was bright, his step brisk, and his bearing
     assured. He was plainly but neatly dressed, and his age, I should
     judge, would be nearer forty than thirty.

     "'Mr. Hatherley?' said he, with something of a German accent. 'You
     have been recommended to me, Mr. Hatherley, as being a man who is not
     only proficient in his profession but is also discreet and capable of
     preserving a secret.'

     "I bowed, feeling as flattered as any young man would at such an
     address. 'May I ask who it was who gave me so good a character?' 

     "'Well, perhaps it is better that I should not tell you that just at
     this moment. I have it from the same source that you are both an
     orphan and a bachelor and are residing alone in London.'

     "'That is quite correct,' I answered; 'but you will excuse me if I
     say that I cannot see how all this bears upon my professional
     qualifications. I understand that it was on a professional matter
     that you wished to speak to me?'

     "'Undoubtedly so. But you will find that all I say is really to the
     point. I have a professional commission for you, but absolute secrecy
     is quite essential--absolute secrecy, you understand, and of course
     we may expect that more from a man who is alone than from one who
     lives in the bosom of his family.'

     "'If I promise to keep a secret,' said I, 'you may absolutely depend
     upon my doing so.'

     "He looked very hard at me as I spoke, and it seemed to me that I had
     never seen so suspicious and questioning an eye.

     "'Do you promise, then?' said he at last.

     "'Yes, I promise.'

     "'Absolute and complete silence before, during, and after? No
     reference to the matter at all, either in word or writing?'

     "'I have already given you my word.'

     "'Very good.' He suddenly sprang up, and darting like lightning
     across the room he flung open the door. The passage outside was
     empty.

     "'That's all right,' said he, coming back. 'I know that clerks are
     sometimes curious as to their master's affairs. Now we can talk in
     safety.' He drew up his chair very close to mine and began to stare
     at me again with the same questioning and thoughtful look.

     "A feeling of repulsion, and of something akin to fear had begun to
     rise within me at the strange antics of this fleshless man. Even my
     dread of losing a client could not restrain me from showing my
     impatience.

     "'I beg that you will state your business, sir,' said I; 'my time is
     of value.' Heaven forgive me for that last sentence, but the words
     came to my lips.

     "'How would fifty guineas for a night's work suit you?' he asked.

     "'Most admirably.'

     "'I say a night's work, but an hour's would be nearer the mark. I
     simply want your opinion about a hydraulic stamping machine which has
     got out of gear. If you show us what is wrong we shall soon set it
     right ourselves. What do you think of such a commission as that?'

     "'The work appears to be light and the pay munificent.'

     "'Precisely so. We shall want you to come to-night by the last
     train.'

     "'Where to?'

     "'To Eyford, in Berkshire. It is a little place near the borders of
     Oxfordshire, and within seven miles of Reading. There is a train from
     Paddington which would bring you there at about 11.15.'

     "'Very good.'

     "'I shall come down in a carriage to meet you.'

     "'There is a drive, then?'

     "'Yes, our little place is quite out in the country. It is a good
     seven miles from Eyford Station.'

     "'Then we can hardly get there before midnight. I suppose there would
     be no chance of a train back. I should be compelled to stop the
     night.'

     "'Yes, we could easily give you a shake-down.'

     "'That is very awkward. Could I not come at some more convenient
     hour?'

     "'We have judged it best that you should come late. It is to
     recompense you for any inconvenience that we are paying to you, a
     young and unknown man, a fee which would buy an opinion from the very
     heads of your profession. Still, of course, if you would like to draw
     out of the business, there is plenty of time to do so.'

     "I thought of the fifty guineas, and of how very useful they would be
     to me. 'Not at all,' said I, 'I shall be very happy to accommodate
     myself to your wishes. I should like, however, to understand a little
     more clearly what it is that you wish me to do.'

     "'Quite so. It is very natural that the pledge of secrecy which we
     have exacted from you should have aroused your curiosity. I have no
     wish to commit you to anything without your having it all laid before
     you. I suppose that we are absolutely safe from eavesdroppers?'

     "'Entirely.'

     "'Then the matter stands thus. You are probably aware that
     fuller's-earth is a valuable product, and that it is only found in
     one or two places in England?'

     "'I have heard so.'

     "'Some little time ago I bought a small place--a very small
     place--within ten miles of Reading. I was fortunate enough to
     discover that there was a deposit of fuller's-earth in one of my
     fields. On examining it, however, I found that this deposit was a
     comparatively small one, and that it formed a link between two very
     much larger ones upon the right and left--both of them, however, in
     the grounds of my neighbours. These good people were absolutely
     ignorant that their land contained that which was quite as valuable
     as a gold-mine. Naturally, it was to my interest to buy their land
     before they discovered its true value, but unfortunately I had no
     capital by which I could do this. I took a few of my friends into the
     secret, however, and they suggested that we should quietly and
     secretly work our own little deposit and that in this way we should
     earn the money which would enable us to buy the neighbouring fields.
     This we have now been doing for some time, and in order to help us in
     our operations we erected a hydraulic press. This press, as I have
     already explained, has got out of order, and we wish your advice upon
     the subject. We guard our secret very jealously, however, and if it
     once became known that we had hydraulic engineers coming to our
     little house, it would soon rouse inquiry, and then, if the facts
     came out, it would be good-bye to any chance of getting these fields
     and carrying out our plans. That is why I have made you promise me
     that you will not tell a human being that you are going to Eyford
     to-night. I hope that I make it all plain?'

     "'I quite follow you,' said I. 'The only point which I could not
     quite understand was what use you could make of a hydraulic press in
     excavating fuller's-earth, which, as I understand, is dug out like
     gravel from a pit.'

     "'Ah!' said he carelessly, 'we have our own process. We compress the
     earth into bricks, so as to remove them without revealing what they
     are. But that is a mere detail. I have taken you fully into my
     confidence now, Mr. Hatherley, and I have shown you how I trust you.'
     He rose as he spoke. 'I shall expect you, then, at Eyford at 11.15.'

     "'I shall certainly be there.'

     "'And not a word to a soul.' He looked at me with a last long,
     questioning gaze, and then, pressing my hand in a cold, dank grasp,
     he hurried from the room.

     "Well, when I came to think it all over in cool blood I was very much
     astonished, as you may both think, at this sudden commission which
     had been intrusted to me. On the one hand, of course, I was glad, for
     the fee was at least tenfold what I should have asked had I set a
     price upon my own services, and it was possible that this order might
     lead to other ones. On the other hand, the face and manner of my
     patron had made an unpleasant impression upon me, and I could not
     think that his explanation of the fuller's-earth was sufficient to
     explain the necessity for my coming at midnight, and his extreme
     anxiety lest I should tell anyone of my errand. However, I threw all
     fears to the winds, ate a hearty supper, drove to Paddington, and
     started off, having obeyed to the letter the injunction as to holding
     my tongue.

     "At Reading I had to change not only my carriage but my station.
     However, I was in time for the last train to Eyford, and I reached
     the little dim-lit station after eleven o'clock. I was the only
     passenger who got out there, and there was no one upon the platform
     save a single sleepy porter with a lantern. As I passed out through
     the wicket gate, however, I found my acquaintance of the morning
     waiting in the shadow upon the other side. Without a word he grasped
     my arm and hurried me into a carriage, the door of which was standing
     open. He drew up the windows on either side, tapped on the wood-work,
     and away we went as fast as the horse could go."

     "One horse?" interjected Holmes.

     "Yes, only one."

     "Did you observe the colour?"

     "Yes, I saw it by the side-lights when I was stepping into the
     carriage. It was a chestnut."

     "Tired-looking or fresh?"

     "Oh, fresh and glossy."

     "Thank you. I am sorry to have interrupted you. Pray continue your
     most interesting statement."

     "Away we went then, and we drove for at least an hour. Colonel
     Lysander Stark had said that it was only seven miles, but I should
     think, from the rate that we seemed to go, and from the time that we
     took, that it must have been nearer twelve. He sat at my side in
     silence all the time, and I was aware, more than once when I glanced
     in his direction, that he was looking at me with great intensity. The
     country roads seem to be not very good in that part of the world, for
     we lurched and jolted terribly. I tried to look out of the windows to
     see something of where we were, but they were made of frosted glass,
     and I could make out nothing save the occasional bright blur of a
     passing light. Now and then I hazarded some remark to break the
     monotony of the journey, but the colonel answered only in
     monosyllables, and the conversation soon flagged. At last, however,
     the bumping of the road was exchanged for the crisp smoothness of a
     gravel-drive, and the carriage came to a stand. Colonel Lysander
     Stark sprang out, and, as I followed after him, pulled me swiftly
     into a porch which gaped in front of us. We stepped, as it were,
     right out of the carriage and into the hall, so that I failed to
     catch the most fleeting glance of the front of the house. The instant
     that I had crossed the threshold the door slammed heavily behind us,
     and I heard faintly the rattle of the wheels as the carriage drove
     away.

     "It was pitch dark inside the house, and the colonel fumbled about
     looking for matches and muttering under his breath. Suddenly a door
     opened at the other end of the passage, and a long, golden bar of
     light shot out in our direction. It grew broader, and a woman
     appeared with a lamp in her hand, which she held above her head,
     pushing her face forward and peering at us. I could see that she was
     pretty, and from the gloss with which the light shone upon her dark
     dress I knew that it was a rich material. She spoke a few words in a
     foreign tongue in a tone as though asking a question, and when my
     companion answered in a gruff monosyllable she gave such a start that
     the lamp nearly fell from her hand. Colonel Stark went up to her,
     whispered something in her ear, and then, pushing her back into the
     room from whence she had come, he walked towards me again with the
     lamp in his hand.

     "'Perhaps you will have the kindness to wait in this room for a few
     minutes,' said he, throwing open another door. It was a quiet,
     little, plainly furnished room, with a round table in the centre, on
     which several German books were scattered. Colonel Stark laid down
     the lamp on the top of a harmonium beside the door. 'I shall not keep
     you waiting an instant,' said he, and vanished into the darkness.

     "I glanced at the books upon the table, and in spite of my ignorance
     of German I could see that two of them were treatises on science, the
     others being volumes of poetry. Then I walked across to the window,
     hoping that I might catch some glimpse of the country-side, but an
     oak shutter, heavily barred, was folded across it. It was a
     wonderfully silent house. There was an old clock ticking loudly
     somewhere in the passage, but otherwise everything was deadly still.
     A vague feeling of uneasiness began to steal over me. Who were these
     German people, and what were they doing living in this strange,
     out-of-the-way place? And where was the place? I was ten miles or so
     from Eyford, that was all I knew, but whether north, south, east, or
     west I had no idea. For that matter, Reading, and possibly other
     large towns, were within that radius, so the place might not be so
     secluded, after all. Yet it was quite certain, from the absolute
     stillness, that we were in the country. I paced up and down the room,
     humming a tune under my breath to keep up my spirits and feeling that
     I was thoroughly earning my fifty-guinea fee.

     "Suddenly, without any preliminary sound in the midst of the utter
     stillness, the door of my room swung slowly open. The woman was
     standing in the aperture, the darkness of the hall behind her, the
     yellow light from my lamp beating upon her eager and beautiful face.
     I could see at a glance that she was sick with fear, and the sight
     sent a chill to my own heart. She held up one shaking finger to warn
     me to be silent, and she shot a few whispered words of broken English
     at me, her eyes glancing back, like those of a frightened horse, into
     the gloom behind her.

     "'I would go,' said she, trying hard, as it seemed to me, to speak
     calmly; 'I would go. I should not stay here. There is no good for you
     to do.'

     "'But, madam,' said I, 'I have not yet done what I came for. I cannot
     possibly leave until I have seen the machine.'

     "'It is not worth your while to wait,' she went on. 'You can pass
     through the door; no one hinders.' And then, seeing that I smiled and
     shook my head, she suddenly threw aside her constraint and made a
     step forward, with her hands wrung together. 'For the love of
     Heaven!' she whispered, 'get away from here before it is too late!'

     "But I am somewhat headstrong by nature, and the more ready to engage
     in an affair when there is some obstacle in the way. I thought of my
     fifty-guinea fee, of my wearisome journey, and of the unpleasant
     night which seemed to be before me. Was it all to go for nothing? Why
     should I slink away without having carried out my commission, and
     without the payment which was my due? This woman might, for all I
     knew, be a monomaniac. With a stout bearing, therefore, though her
     manner had shaken me more than I cared to confess, I still shook my
     head and declared my intention of remaining where I was. She was
     about to renew her entreaties when a door slammed overhead, and the
     sound of several footsteps was heard upon the stairs. She listened
     for an instant, threw up her hands with a despairing gesture, and
     vanished as suddenly and as noiselessly as she had come.

     "The newcomers were Colonel Lysander Stark and a short thick man with
     a chinchilla beard growing out of the creases of his double chin, who
     was introduced to me as Mr. Ferguson.

     "'This is my secretary and manager,' said the colonel. 'By the way, I
     was under the impression that I left this door shut just now. I fear
     that you have felt the draught.'

     "'On the contrary,' said I, 'I opened the door myself because I felt
     the room to be a little close.'

     "He shot one of his suspicious looks at me. 'Perhaps we had better
     proceed to business, then,' said he. 'Mr. Ferguson and I will take
     you up to see the machine.'

     "'I had better put my hat on, I suppose.'

     "'Oh, no, it is in the house.'

     "'What, you dig fuller's-earth in the house?'

     "'No, no. This is only where we compress it. But never mind that. All
     we wish you to do is to examine the machine and to let us know what
     is wrong with it.'

     "We went upstairs together, the colonel first with the lamp, the fat
     manager and I behind him. It was a labyrinth of an old house, with
     corridors, passages, narrow winding staircases, and little low doors,
     the thresholds of which were hollowed out by the generations who had
     crossed them. There were no carpets and no signs of any furniture
     above the ground floor, while the plaster was peeling off the walls,
     and the damp was breaking through in green, unhealthy blotches. I
     tried to put on as unconcerned an air as possible, but I had not
     forgotten the warnings of the lady, even though I disregarded them,
     and I kept a keen eye upon my two companions. Ferguson appeared to be
     a morose and silent man, but I could see from the little that he said
     that he was at least a fellow-countryman.

     "Colonel Lysander Stark stopped at last before a low door, which he
     unlocked. Within was a small, square room, in which the three of us
     could hardly get at one time. Ferguson remained outside, and the
     colonel ushered me in.

     "'We are now,' said he, 'actually within the hydraulic press, and it
     would be a particularly unpleasant thing for us if anyone were to
     turn it on. The ceiling of this small chamber is really the end of
     the descending piston, and it comes down with the force of many tons
     upon this metal floor. There are small lateral columns of water
     outside which receive the force, and which transmit and multiply it
     in the manner which is familiar to you. The machine goes readily
     enough, but there is some stiffness in the working of it, and it has
     lost a little of its force. Perhaps you will have the goodness to
     look it over and to show us how we can set it right.'

     "I took the lamp from him, and I examined the machine very
     thoroughly. It was indeed a gigantic one, and capable of exercising
     enormous pressure. When I passed outside, however, and pressed down
     the levers which controlled it, I knew at once by the whishing sound
     that there was a slight leakage, which allowed a regurgitation of
     water through one of the side cylinders. An examination showed that
     one of the india-rubber bands which was round the head of a
     driving-rod had shrunk so as not quite to fill the socket along which
     it worked. This was clearly the cause of the loss of power, and I
     pointed it out to my companions, who followed my remarks very
     carefully and asked several practical questions as to how they should
     proceed to set it right. When I had made it clear to them, I returned
     to the main chamber of the machine and took a good look at it to
     satisfy my own curiosity. It was obvious at a glance that the story
     of the fuller's-earth was the merest fabrication, for it would be
     absurd to suppose that so powerful an engine could be designed for so
     inadequate a purpose. The walls were of wood, but the floor consisted
     of a large iron trough, and when I came to examine it I could see a
     crust of metallic deposit all over it. I had stooped and was scraping
     at this to see exactly what it was when I heard a muttered
     exclamation in German and saw the cadaverous face of the colonel
     looking down at me.

     "'What are you doing there?' he asked.

     "I felt angry at having been tricked by so elaborate a story as that
     which he had told me. 'I was admiring your fuller's-earth,' said I;
     'I think that I should be better able to advise you as to your
     machine if I knew what the exact purpose was for which it was used.'

     "The instant that I uttered the words I regretted the rashness of my
     speech. His face set hard, and a baleful light sprang up in his grey
     eyes.

     "'Very well,' said he, 'you shall know all about the machine.' He
     took a step backward, slammed the little door, and turned the key in
     the lock. I rushed towards it and pulled at the handle, but it was
     quite secure, and did not give in the least to my kicks and shoves.
     'Hullo!' I yelled. 'Hullo! Colonel! Let me out!'

     "And then suddenly in the silence I heard a sound which sent my heart
     into my mouth. It was the clank of the levers and the swish of the
     leaking cylinder. He had set the engine at work. The lamp still stood
     upon the floor where I had placed it when examining the trough. By
     its light I saw that the black ceiling was coming down upon me,
     slowly, jerkily, but, as none knew better than myself, with a force
     which must within a minute grind me to a shapeless pulp. I threw
     myself, screaming, against the door, and dragged with my nails at the
     lock. I implored the colonel to let me out, but the remorseless
     clanking of the levers drowned my cries. The ceiling was only a foot
     or two above my head, and with my hand upraised I could feel its
     hard, rough surface. Then it flashed through my mind that the pain of
     my death would depend very much upon the position in which I met it.
     If I lay on my face the weight would come upon my spine, and I
     shuddered to think of that dreadful snap. Easier the other way,
     perhaps; and yet, had I the nerve to lie and look up at that deadly
     black shadow wavering down upon me? Already I was unable to stand
     erect, when my eye caught something which brought a gush of hope back
     to my heart.

     "I have said that though the floor and ceiling were of iron, the
     walls were of wood. As I gave a last hurried glance around, I saw a
     thin line of yellow light between two of the boards, which broadened
     and broadened as a small panel was pushed backward. For an instant I
     could hardly believe that here was indeed a door which led away from
     death. The next instant I threw myself through, and lay half-fainting
     upon the other side. The panel had closed again behind me, but the
     crash of the lamp, and a few moments afterwards the clang of the two
     slabs of metal, told me how narrow had been my escape.

     "I was recalled to myself by a frantic plucking at my wrist, and I
     found myself lying upon the stone floor of a narrow corridor, while a
     woman bent over me and tugged at me with her left hand, while she
     held a candle in her right. It was the same good friend whose warning
     I had so foolishly rejected.

     "'Come! come!' she cried breathlessly. 'They will be here in a
     moment. They will see that you are not there. Oh, do not waste the
     so-precious time, but come!'

     "This time, at least, I did not scorn her advice. I staggered to my
     feet and ran with her along the corridor and down a winding stair.
     The latter led to another broad passage, and just as we reached it we
     heard the sound of running feet and the shouting of two voices, one
     answering the other from the floor on which  we were and from the one
     beneath. My guide stopped and looked about her like one  who is at
     her wit's end. Then she threw open a door which led into a bedroom,
     through the window of which the moon was shining brightly.

     "'It is your only chance,' said she. 'It is high, but it may be that
     you can jump it.'

     "As she spoke a light sprang into view at the further end of the
     passage, and I saw the lean figure of Colonel Lysander Stark rushing
     forward with a lantern in one hand and a weapon like a butcher's
     cleaver in the other. I rushed across the bedroom, flung open the
     window, and looked out. How quiet and sweet and wholesome the garden
     looked in the moonlight, and it could not be more than thirty feet
     down. I clambered out upon the sill, but I hesitated to jump until I
     should have heard what passed between my saviour and the ruffian who
     pursued me. If she were ill-used, then at any risks I was determined
     to go back to her assistance. The thought had hardly flashed through
     my mind before he was at the door, pushing his way past her; but she
     threw her arms round him and tried to hold him back.

     "'Fritz! Fritz!' she cried in English, 'remember your promise after
     the last time. You said it should not be again. He will be silent!
     Oh, he will be silent!'

     "'You are mad, Elise!' he shouted, struggling to break away from her.
     'You will be the ruin of us. He has seen too much. Let me pass, I
     say!' He dashed her to one side, and, rushing to the window, cut at
     me with his heavy weapon. I had let myself go, and was hanging by the
     hands to the sill, when his blow fell. I was conscious of a dull
     pain, my grip loosened, and I fell into the garden below.

     "I was shaken but not hurt by the fall; so I picked myself up and
     rushed off among the bushes as hard as I could run, for I understood
     that I was far from being out of danger yet. Suddenly, however, as I
     ran, a deadly dizziness and sickness came over me. I glanced down at
     my hand, which was throbbing painfully, and then, for the first time,
     saw that my thumb had been cut off and that the blood was pouring
     from my wound. I endeavoured to tie my handkerchief round it, but
     there came a sudden buzzing in my ears, and next moment I fell in a
     dead faint among the rose-bushes.

     "How long I remained unconscious I cannot tell. It must have been a
     very long time, for the moon had sunk, and a bright morning was
     breaking when I came to myself. My clothes were all sodden with dew,
     and my coat-sleeve was drenched with blood from my wounded thumb. The
     smarting of it recalled in an instant all the particulars of my
     night's adventure, and I sprang to my feet with the feeling that I
     might hardly yet be safe from my pursuers. But to my astonishment,
     when I came to look round me, neither house nor garden were to be
     seen. I had been lying in an angle of the hedge close by the
     highroad, and just a little lower down was a long building, which
     proved, upon my approaching it, to be the very station at which I had
     arrived upon the previous night. Were it not for the ugly wound upon
     my hand, all that had passed during those dreadful hours might have
     been an evil dream.

     "Half dazed, I went into the station and asked about the morning
     train. There would be one to Reading in less than an hour. The same
     porter was on duty, I found, as had been there when I arrived. I
     inquired of him whether he had ever heard of Colonel Lysander Stark.
     The name was strange to him. Had he observed a carriage the night
     before waiting for me? No, he had not. Was there a police-station
     anywhere near? There was one about three miles off.

     "It was too far for me to go, weak and ill as I was. I determined to
     wait until I got back to town before telling my story to the police.
     It was a little past six when I arrived, so I went first to have my
     wound dressed, and then the doctor was kind enough to bring me along
     here. I put the case into your hands and shall do exactly what you
     advise."

     We both sat in silence for some little time after listening to this
     extraordinary narrative. Then Sherlock Holmes pulled down from the
     shelf one of the ponderous commonplace books in which he placed his
     cuttings.

     "Here is an advertisement which will interest you," said he. "It
     appeared in all the papers about a year ago. Listen to this:

     "'Lost, on the 9th inst., Mr. Jeremiah Hayling, aged twenty-six, a
     hydraulic engineer. Left his lodgings at ten o'clock at night, and
     has not been heard of since. Was dressed in--'

     etc., etc. Ha! That represents the last time that the colonel needed
     to have his machine overhauled, I fancy."

     "Good heavens!" cried my patient. "Then that explains what the girl
     said."

     "Undoubtedly. It is quite clear that the colonel was a cool and
     desperate man, who was absolutely determined that nothing should
     stand in the way of his little game, like those out-and-out pirates
     who will leave no survivor from a captured ship. Well, every moment
     now is precious, so if you feel equal to it we shall go down to
     Scotland Yard at once as a preliminary to starting for Eyford."

     Some three hours or so afterwards we were all in the train together,
     bound from Reading to the little Berkshire village. There were
     Sherlock Holmes, the hydraulic engineer, Inspector Bradstreet, of
     Scotland Yard, a plain-clothes man, and myself. Bradstreet had spread
     an ordnance map of the county out upon the seat and was busy with his
     compasses drawing a circle with Eyford for its centre.

     "There you are," said he. "That circle is drawn at a radius of ten
     miles from the village. The place we want must be somewhere near that
     line. You said ten miles, I think, sir."

     "It was an hour's good drive."

     "And you think that they brought you back all that way when you were
     unconscious?"

     "They must have done so. I have a confused memory, too, of having
     been lifted and conveyed somewhere."

     "What I cannot understand," said I, "is why they should have spared
     you when they found you lying fainting in the garden. Perhaps the
     villain was softened by the woman's entreaties."

     "I hardly think that likely. I never saw a more inexorable face in my
     life."

     "Oh, we shall soon clear up all that," said Bradstreet. "Well, I have
     drawn my circle, and I only wish I knew at what point upon it the
     folk that we are in search of are to be found."

     "I think I could lay my finger on it," said Holmes quietly.

     "Really, now!" cried the inspector, "you have formed your opinion!
     Come, now, we shall see who agrees with you. I say it is south, for
     the country is more deserted there."

     "And I say east," said my patient.

     "I am for west," remarked the plain-clothes man. "There are several
     quiet little villages up there."

     "And I am for north," said I, "because there are no hills there, and
     our friend says that he did not notice the carriage go up any."

     "Come," cried the inspector, laughing; "it's a very pretty diversity
     of opinion. We have boxed the compass among us. Who do you give your
     casting vote to?"

     "You are all wrong."

     "But we can't all be."

     "Oh, yes, you can. This is my point." He placed his finger in the
     centre of the circle. "This is where we shall find them."

     "But the twelve-mile drive?" gasped Hatherley.

     "Six out and six back. Nothing simpler. You say yourself that the
     horse was fresh and glossy when you got in. How could it be that if
     it had gone twelve miles over heavy roads?"

     "Indeed, it is a likely ruse enough," observed Bradstreet
     thoughtfully. "Of course there can be no doubt as to the nature of
     this gang."

     "None at all," said Holmes. "They are coiners on a large scale, and
     have used the machine to form the amalgam which has taken the place
     of silver."

     "We have known for some time that a clever gang was at work," said
     the inspector. "They have been turning out half-crowns by the
     thousand. We even traced them as far as Reading, but could get no
     farther, for they had covered their traces in a way that showed that
     they were very old hands. But now, thanks to this lucky chance, I
     think that we have got them right enough."

     But the inspector was mistaken, for those criminals were not destined
     to fall into the hands of justice. As we rolled into Eyford Station
     we saw a gigantic column of smoke which streamed up from behind a
     small clump of trees in the neighbourhood and hung like an immense
     ostrich feather over the landscape.

     "A house on fire?" asked Bradstreet as the train steamed off again on
     its way.

     "Yes, sir!" said the station-master.

     "When did it break out?"

     "I hear that it was during the night, sir, but it has got worse, and
     the whole place is in a blaze."

     "Whose house is it?"

     "Dr. Becher's."

     "Tell me," broke in the engineer, "is Dr. Becher a German, very thin,
     with a long, sharp nose?"

     The station-master laughed heartily. "No, sir, Dr. Becher is an
     Englishman, and there isn't a man in the parish who has a
     better-lined waistcoat. But he has a gentleman staying with him, a
     patient, as I understand, who is a foreigner, and he looks as if a
     little good Berkshire beef would do him no harm."

     The station-master had not finished his speech before we were all
     hastening in the direction of the fire. The road topped a low hill,
     and there was a great widespread whitewashed building in front of us,
     spouting fire at every chink and window, while in the garden in front
     three fire-engines were vainly striving to keep the flames under.

     "That's it!" cried Hatherley, in intense excitement. "There is the
     gravel-drive, and there are the rose-bushes where I lay. That second
     window is the one that I jumped from."

     "Well, at least," said Holmes, "you have had your revenge upon them.
     There can be no question that it was your oil-lamp which, when it was
     crushed in the press, set fire to the wooden walls, though no doubt
     they were too excited in the chase after you to observe it at the
     time. Now keep your eyes open in this crowd for your friends of last
     night, though I very much fear that they are a good hundred miles off
     by now."

     And Holmes' fears came to be realised, for from that day to this no
     word has ever been heard either of the beautiful woman, the sinister
     German, or the morose Englishman. Early that morning a peasant had
     met a cart containing several people and some very bulky boxes
     driving rapidly in the direction of Reading, but there all traces of
     the fugitives disappeared, and even Holmes' ingenuity failed ever to
     discover the least clue as to their whereabouts.

     The firemen had been much perturbed at the strange arrangements which
     they had found within, and still more so by discovering a newly
     severed human thumb upon a window-sill of the second floor. About
     sunset, however, their efforts were at last successful, and they
     subdued the flames, but not before the roof had fallen in, and the
     whole place been reduced to such absolute ruin that, save some
     twisted cylinders and iron piping, not a trace remained of the
     machinery which had cost our unfortunate acquaintance so dearly.
     Large masses of nickel and of tin were discovered stored in an
     out-house, but no coins were to be found, which may have explained
     the presence of those bulky boxes which have been already referred
     to.

     How our hydraulic engineer had been conveyed from the garden to the
     spot where he recovered his senses might have remained forever a
     mystery were it not for the soft mould, which told us a very plain
     tale. He had evidently been carried down by two persons, one of whom
     had remarkably small feet and the other unusually large ones. On the
     whole, it was most probable that the silent Englishman, being less
     bold or less murderous than his companion, had assisted the woman to
     bear the unconscious man out of the way of danger.

     "Well," said our engineer ruefully as we took our seats to return
     once more to London, "it has been a pretty business for me! I have
     lost my thumb and I have lost a fifty-guinea fee, and what have I
     gained?"

     "Experience," said Holmes, laughing. "Indirectly it may be of value,
     you know; you have only to put it into words to gain the reputation
     of being excellent company for the remainder of your existence."






                       THE ADVENTURE OF THE NOBLE BACHELOR

     The Lord St. Simon marriage, and its curious termination, have long
     ceased to be a subject of interest in those exalted circles in which
     the unfortunate bridegroom moves. Fresh scandals have eclipsed it,
     and their more piquant details have drawn the gossips away from this
     four-year-old drama. As I have reason to believe, however, that the
     full facts have never been revealed to the general public, and as my
     friend Sherlock Holmes had a considerable share in clearing the
     matter up, I feel that no memoir of him would be complete without
     some little sketch of this remarkable episode.

     It was a few weeks before my own marriage, during the days when I was
     still sharing rooms with Holmes in Baker Street, that he came home
     from an afternoon stroll to find a letter on the table waiting for
     him. I had remained indoors all day, for the weather had taken a
     sudden turn to rain, with high autumnal winds, and the Jezail bullet
     which I had brought back in one of my limbs as a relic of my Afghan
     campaign throbbed with dull persistence. With my body in one
     easy-chair and my legs upon another, I had surrounded myself with a
     cloud of newspapers until at last, saturated with the news of the
     day, I tossed them all aside and lay listless, watching the huge
     crest and monogram upon the envelope upon the table and wondering
     lazily who my friend's noble correspondent could be.

     "Here is a very fashionable epistle," I remarked as he entered. "Your
     morning letters, if I remember right, were from a fish-monger and a
     tide-waiter."

     "Yes, my correspondence has certainly the charm of variety," he
     answered, smiling, "and the humbler are usually the more interesting.
     This looks like one of those unwelcome social summonses which call
     upon a man either to be bored or to lie."

     He broke the seal and glanced over the contents.

     "Oh, come, it may prove to be something of interest, after all."

     "Not social, then?"

     "No, distinctly professional."

     "And from a noble client?"

     "One of the highest in England."

     "My dear fellow, I congratulate you."

     "I assure you, Watson, without affectation, that the status of my
     client is a matter of less moment to me than the interest of his
     case. It is just possible, however, that that also may not be wanting
     in this new investigation. You have been reading the papers
     diligently of late, have you not?"

     "It looks like it," said I ruefully, pointing to a huge bundle in the
     corner. "I have had nothing else to do."

     "It is fortunate, for you will perhaps be able to post me up. I read
     nothing except the criminal news and the agony column. The latter is
     always instructive. But if you have followed recent events so closely
     you must have read about Lord St. Simon and his wedding?"

     "Oh, yes, with the deepest interest."

     "That is well. The letter which I hold in my hand is from Lord St.
     Simon. I will read it to you, and in return you must turn over these
     papers and let me have whatever bears upon the matter. This is what
     he says:

     "'My dear Mr. Sherlock Holmes:
     "'Lord Backwater tells me that I may place implicit reliance upon
     your judgment and discretion. I have determined, therefore, to call
     upon you and to consult you in reference to the very painful event
     which has occurred in connection with my wedding. Mr. Lestrade, of
     Scotland Yard, is acting already in the matter, but he assures me
     that he sees no objection to your co-operation, and that he even
     thinks that it might be of some assistance. I will call at four
     o'clock in the afternoon, and, should you have any other engagement
     at that time, I hope that you will postpone it, as this matter is of
     paramount importance.
     "'Yours faithfully,
     "'St. Simon.'

     "It is dated from Grosvenor Mansions, written with a quill pen, and
     the noble lord has had the misfortune to get a smear of ink upon the
     outer side of his right little finger," remarked Holmes as he folded
     up the epistle.

     "He says four o'clock. It is three now. He will be here in an hour."

     "Then I have just time, with your assistance, to get clear upon the
     subject. Turn over those papers and arrange the extracts in their
     order of time, while I take a glance as to who our client is." He
     picked a red-covered volume from a line of books of reference beside
     the mantelpiece. "Here he is," said he, sitting down and flattening
     it out upon his knee. "'Lord Robert Walsingham de Vere St. Simon,
     second son of the Duke of Balmoral.' Hum! 'Arms: Azure, three
     caltrops in chief over a fess sable. Born in 1846.' He's forty-one
     years of age, which is mature for marriage. Was Under-Secretary for
     the colonies in a late administration. The Duke, his father, was at
     one time Secretary for Foreign Affairs. They inherit Plantagenet
     blood by direct descent, and Tudor on the distaff side. Ha! Well,
     there is nothing very instructive in all this. I think that I must
     turn to you Watson, for something more solid."

     "I have very little difficulty in finding what I want," said I, "for
     the facts are quite recent, and the matter struck me as remarkable. I
     feared to refer them to you, however, as I knew that you had an
     inquiry on hand and that you disliked the intrusion of other
     matters."

     "Oh, you mean the little problem of the Grosvenor Square furniture
     van. That is quite cleared up now--though, indeed, it was obvious
     from the first. Pray give me the results of your newspaper
     selections."

     "Here is the first notice which I can find. It is in the personal
     column of the Morning Post, and dates, as you see, some weeks back:

     "'A marriage has been arranged [it says] and will, if rumour is
     correct, very shortly take place, between Lord Robert St. Simon,
     second son of the Duke of Balmoral, and Miss Hatty Doran, the only
     daughter of Aloysius Doran. Esq., of San Francisco, Cal., U.S.A.'

     That is all."

     "Terse and to the point," remarked Holmes, stretching his long, thin
     legs towards the fire.

     "There was a paragraph amplifying this in one of the society papers
     of the same week. Ah, here it is:

     "'There will soon be a call for protection in the marriage market,
     for the present free-trade principle appears to tell heavily against
     our home product. One by one the management of the noble houses of
     Great Britain is passing into the hands of our fair cousins from
     across the Atlantic. An important addition has been made during the
     last week to the list of the prizes which have been borne away by
     these charming invaders. Lord St. Simon, who has shown himself for
     over twenty years proof against the little god's arrows, has now
     definitely announced his approaching marriage with Miss Hatty Doran,
     the fascinating daughter of a California millionaire. Miss Doran,
     whose graceful figure and striking face attracted much attention at
     the Westbury House festivities, is an only child, and it is currently
     reported that her dowry will run to considerably over the six
     figures, with expectancies for the future. As it is an open secret
     that the Duke of Balmoral has been compelled to sell his pictures
     within the last few years, and as Lord St. Simon has no property of
     his own save the small estate of Birchmoor, it is obvious that the
     Californian heiress is not the only gainer by an alliance which will
     enable her to make the easy and common transition from a Republican
     lady to a British peeress.'"

     "Anything else?" asked Holmes, yawning.

     "Oh, yes; plenty. Then there is another note in the Morning Post to
     say that the marriage would be an absolutely quiet one, that it would
     be at St. George's, Hanover Square, that only half a dozen intimate
     friends would be invited, and that the party would return to the
     furnished house at Lancaster Gate which has been taken by Mr.
     Aloysius Doran. Two days later--that is, on Wednesday last--there is
     a curt announcement that the wedding had taken place, and that the
     honeymoon would be passed at Lord Backwater's place, near
     Petersfield. Those are all the notices which appeared before the
     disappearance of the bride."

     "Before the what?" asked Holmes with a start.

     "The vanishing of the lady."

     "When did she vanish, then?"

     "At the wedding breakfast."

     "Indeed. This is more interesting than it promised to be; quite
     dramatic, in fact."

     "Yes; it struck me as being a little out of the common."

     "They often vanish before the ceremony, and occasionally during the
     honeymoon; but I cannot call to mind anything quite so prompt as
     this. Pray let me have the details."

     "I warn you that they are very incomplete."

     "Perhaps we may make them less so."

     "Such as they are, they are set forth in a single article of a
     morning paper of yesterday, which I will read to you. It is headed,
     'Singular Occurrence at a Fashionable Wedding':

     "'The family of Lord Robert St. Simon has been thrown into the
     greatest consternation by the strange and painful episodes which have
     taken place in connection with his wedding. The ceremony, as shortly
     announced in the papers of yesterday, occurred on the previous
     morning; but it is only now that it has been possible to confirm the
     strange rumours which have been so persistently floating about. In
     spite of the attempts of the friends to hush the matter up, so much
     public attention has now been drawn to it that no good purpose can be
     served by affecting to disregard what is a common subject for
     conversation.
     "'The ceremony, which was performed at St. George's, Hanover Square,
     was a very quiet one, no one being present save the father of the
     bride, Mr. Aloysius Doran, the Duchess of Balmoral, Lord Backwater,
     Lord Eustace and Lady Clara St. Simon (the younger brother and sister
     of the bridegroom), and Lady Alicia Whittington. The whole party
     proceeded afterwards to the house of Mr. Aloysius Doran, at Lancaster
     Gate, where breakfast had been prepared. It appears that some little
     trouble was caused by a woman, whose name has not been ascertained,
     who endeavoured to force her way into the house after the bridal
     party, alleging that she had some claim upon Lord St. Simon. It was
     only after a painful and prolonged scene that she was ejected by the
     butler and the footman. The bride, who had fortunately entered the
     house before this unpleasant interruption, had sat down to breakfast
     with the rest, when she complained of a sudden indisposition and
     retired to her room. Her prolonged absence having caused some
     comment, her father followed her, but learned from her maid that she
     had only come up to her chamber for an instant, caught up an ulster
     and bonnet, and hurried down to the passage. One of the footmen
     declared that he had seen a lady leave the house thus apparelled, but
     had refused to credit that it was his mistress, believing her to be
     with the company. On ascertaining that his daughter had disappeared,
     Mr. Aloysius Doran, in conjunction with the bridegroom, instantly put
     themselves in communication with the police, and very energetic
     inquiries are being made, which will probably result in a speedy
     clearing up of this very singular business. Up to a late hour last
     night, however, nothing had transpired as to the whereabouts of the
     missing lady. There are rumours of foul play in the matter, and it is
     said that the police have caused the arrest of the woman who had
     caused the original disturbance, in the belief that, from jealousy or
     some other motive, she may have been concerned in the strange
     disappearance of the bride.'"

     "And is that all?"

     "Only one little item in another of the morning papers, but it is a
     suggestive one."

     "And it is--"

     "That Miss Flora Millar, the lady who had caused the disturbance, has
     actually been arrested. It appears that she was formerly a danseuse
     at the Allegro, and that she has known the bridegroom for some years.
     There are no further particulars, and the whole case is in your hands
     now--so far as it has been set forth in the public press."

     "And an exceedingly interesting case it appears to be. I would not
     have missed it for worlds. But there is a ring at the bell, Watson,
     and as the clock makes it a few minutes after four, I have no doubt
     that this will prove to be our noble client. Do not dream of going,
     Watson, for I very much prefer having a witness, if only as a check
     to my own memory."

     "Lord Robert St. Simon," announced our page-boy, throwing open the
     door. A gentleman entered, with a pleasant, cultured face, high-nosed
     and pale, with something perhaps of petulance about the mouth, and
     with the steady, well-opened eye of a man whose pleasant lot it had
     ever been to command and to be obeyed. His manner was brisk, and yet
     his general appearance gave an undue impression of age, for he had a
     slight forward stoop and a little bend of the knees as he walked. His
     hair, too, as he swept off his very curly-brimmed hat, was grizzled
     round the edges and thin upon the top. As to his dress, it was
     careful to the verge of foppishness, with high collar, black
     frock-coat, white waistcoat, yellow gloves, patent-leather shoes, and
     light-coloured gaiters. He advanced slowly into the room, turning his
     head from left to right, and swinging in his right hand the cord
     which held his golden eyeglasses.

     "Good-day, Lord St. Simon," said Holmes, rising and bowing. "Pray
     take the basket-chair. This is my friend and colleague, Dr. Watson.
     Draw up a little to the fire, and we will talk this matter over."

     "A most painful matter to me, as you can most readily imagine, Mr.
     Holmes. I have been cut to the quick. I understand that you have
     already managed several delicate cases of this sort, sir, though I
     presume that they were hardly from the same class of society."

     "No, I am descending."

     "I beg pardon."

     "My last client of the sort was a king."

     "Oh, really! I had no idea. And which king?"

     "The King of Scandinavia."

     "What! Had he lost his wife?"

     "You can understand," said Holmes suavely, "that I extend to the
     affairs of my other clients the same secrecy which I promise to you
     in yours."

     "Of course! Very right! very right! I'm sure I beg pardon. As to my
     own case, I am ready to give you any information which may assist you
     in forming an opinion."

     "Thank you. I have already learned all that is in the public prints,
     nothing more. I presume that I may take it as correct--this article,
     for example, as to the disappearance of the bride."

     Lord St. Simon glanced over it. "Yes, it is correct, as far as it
     goes."

     "But it needs a great deal of supplementing before anyone could offer
     an opinion. I think that I may arrive at my facts most directly by
     questioning you."

     "Pray do so."

     "When did you first meet Miss Hatty Doran?"

     "In San Francisco, a year ago."

     "You were travelling in the States?"

     "Yes."

     "Did you become engaged then?"

     "No."

     "But you were on a friendly footing?"

     "I was amused by her society, and she could see that I was amused."

     "Her father is very rich?"

     "He is said to be the richest man on the Pacific slope."

     "And how did he make his money?"

     "In mining. He had nothing a few years ago. Then he struck gold,
     invested it, and came up by leaps and bounds."

     "Now, what is your own impression as to the young lady's--your wife's
     character?"

     The nobleman swung his glasses a little faster and stared down into
     the fire. "You see, Mr. Holmes," said he, "my wife was twenty before
     her father became a rich man. During that time she ran free in a
     mining camp and wandered through woods or mountains, so that her
     education has come from Nature rather than from the schoolmaster. She
     is what we call in England a tomboy, with a strong nature, wild and
     free, unfettered by any sort of traditions. She is
     impetuous--volcanic, I was about to say. She is swift in making up
     her mind and fearless in carrying out her resolutions. On the other
     hand, I would not have given her the name which I have the honour to
     bear"--he gave a little stately cough--"had not I thought her to be
     at bottom a noble woman. I believe that she is capable of heroic
     self-sacrifice and that anything dishonourable would be repugnant to
     her."

     "Have you her photograph?"

     "I brought this with me." He opened a locket and showed us the full
     face of a very lovely woman. It was not a photograph but an ivory
     miniature, and the artist had brought out the full effect of the
     lustrous black hair, the large dark eyes, and the exquisite mouth.
     Holmes gazed long and earnestly at it. Then he closed the locket and
     handed it back to Lord St. Simon.

     "The young lady came to London, then, and you renewed your
     acquaintance?"

     "Yes, her father brought her over for this last London season. I met
     her several times, became engaged to her, and have now married her."

     "She brought, I understand, a considerable dowry?"

     "A fair dowry. Not more than is usual in my family."

     "And this, of course, remains to you, since the marriage is a fait
     accompli?"

     "I really have made no inquiries on the subject."

     "Very naturally not. Did you see Miss Doran on the day before the
     wedding?"

     "Yes."

     "Was she in good spirits?"

     "Never better. She kept talking of what we should do in our future
     lives."

     "Indeed! That is very interesting. And on the morning of the
     wedding?"

     "She was as bright as possible--at least until after the ceremony."

     "And did you observe any change in her then?"

     "Well, to tell the truth, I saw then the first signs that I had ever
     seen that her temper was just a little sharp. The incident however,
     was too trivial to relate and can have no possible bearing upon the
     case."

     "Pray let us have it, for all that."

     "Oh, it is childish. She dropped her bouquet as we went towards the
     vestry. She was passing the front pew at the time, and it fell over
     into the pew. There was a moment's delay, but the gentleman in the
     pew handed it up to her again, and it did not appear to be the worse
     for the fall. Yet when I spoke to her of the matter, she answered me
     abruptly; and in the carriage, on our way home, she seemed absurdly
     agitated over this trifling cause."

     "Indeed! You say that there was a gentleman in the pew. Some of the
     general public were present, then?"

     "Oh, yes. It is impossible to exclude them when the church is open."

     "This gentleman was not one of your wife's friends?"

     "No, no; I call him a gentleman by courtesy, but he was quite a
     common-looking person. I hardly noticed his appearance. But really I
     think that we are wandering rather far from the point."

     "Lady St. Simon, then, returned from the wedding in a less cheerful
     frame of mind than she had gone to it. What did she do on re-entering
     her father's house?"

     "I saw her in conversation with her maid."

     "And who is her maid?"

     "Alice is her name. She is an American and came from California with
     her."

     "A confidential servant?"

     "A little too much so. It seemed to me that her mistress allowed her
     to take great liberties. Still, of course, in America they look upon
     these things in a different way."

     "How long did she speak to this Alice?"

     "Oh, a few minutes. I had something else to think of."

     "You did not overhear what they said?"

     "Lady St. Simon said something about 'jumping a claim.' She was
     accustomed to use slang of the kind. I have no idea what she meant."

     "American slang is very expressive sometimes. And what did your wife
     do when she finished speaking to her maid?"

     "She walked into the breakfast-room."

     "On your arm?"

     "No, alone. She was very independent in little matters like that.
     Then, after we had sat down for ten minutes or so, she rose
     hurriedly, muttered some words of apology, and left the room. She
     never came back."

     "But this maid, Alice, as I understand, deposes that she went to her
     room, covered her bride's dress with a long ulster, put on a bonnet,
     and went out."

     "Quite so. And she was afterwards seen walking into Hyde Park in
     company with Flora Millar, a woman who is now in custody, and who had
     already made a disturbance at Mr. Doran's house that morning."

     "Ah, yes. I should like a few particulars as to this young lady, and
     your relations to her."

     Lord St. Simon shrugged his shoulders and raised his eyebrows. "We
     have been on a friendly footing for some years--I may say on a very
     friendly footing. She used to be at the Allegro. I have not treated
     her ungenerously, and she had no just cause of complaint against me,
     but you know what women are, Mr. Holmes. Flora was a dear little
     thing, but exceedingly hot-headed and devotedly attached to me. She
     wrote me dreadful letters when she heard that I was about to be
     married, and, to tell the truth, the reason why I had the marriage
     celebrated so quietly was that I feared lest there might be a scandal
     in the church. She came to Mr. Doran's door just after we returned,
     and she endeavoured to push her way in, uttering very abusive
     expressions towards my wife, and even threatening her, but I had
     foreseen the possibility of something of the sort, and I had two
     police fellows there in private clothes, who soon pushed her out
     again. She was quiet when she saw that there was no good in making a
     row."

     "Did your wife hear all this?"

     "No, thank goodness, she did not."

     "And she was seen walking with this very woman afterwards?"

     "Yes. That is what Mr. Lestrade, of Scotland Yard, looks upon as so
     serious. It is thought that Flora decoyed my wife out and laid some
     terrible trap for her."

     "Well, it is a possible supposition."

     "You think so, too?"

     "I did not say a probable one. But you do not yourself look upon this
     as likely?"

     "I do not think Flora would hurt a fly."

     "Still, jealousy is a strange transformer of characters. Pray what is
     your own theory as to what took place?"

     "Well, really, I came to seek a theory, not to propound one. I have
     given you all the facts. Since you ask me, however, I may say that it
     has occurred to me as possible that the excitement of this affair,
     the consciousness that she had made so immense a social stride, had
     the effect of causing some little nervous disturbance in my wife."

     "In short, that she had become suddenly deranged?"

     "Well, really, when I consider that she has turned her back--I will
     not say upon me, but upon so much that many have aspired to without
     success--I can hardly explain it in any other fashion."

     "Well, certainly that is also a conceivable hypothesis," said Holmes,
     smiling. "And now, Lord St. Simon, I think that I have nearly all my
     data. May I ask whether you were seated at the breakfast-table so
     that you could see out of the window?"

     "We could see the other side of the road and the Park."

     "Quite so. Then I do not think that I need to detain you longer. I
     shall communicate with you."

     "Should you be fortunate enough to solve this problem," said our
     client, rising.

     "I have solved it."

     "Eh? What was that?"

     "I say that I have solved it."

     "Where, then, is my wife?"

     "That is a detail which I shall speedily supply."

     Lord St. Simon shook his head. "I am afraid that it will take wiser
     heads than yours or mine," he remarked, and bowing in a stately,
     old-fashioned manner he departed.

     "It is very good of Lord St. Simon to honour my head by putting it on
     a level with his own," said Sherlock Holmes, laughing. "I think that
     I shall have a whisky and soda and a cigar after all this
     cross-questioning. I had formed my conclusions as to the case before
     our client came into the room."

     "My dear Holmes!"

     "I have notes of several similar cases, though none, as I remarked
     before, which were quite as prompt. My whole examination served to
     turn my conjecture into a certainty. Circumstantial evidence is
     occasionally very convincing, as when you find a trout in the milk,
     to quote Thoreau's example."

     "But I have heard all that you have heard."

     "Without, however, the knowledge of pre-existing cases which serves
     me so well. There was a parallel instance in Aberdeen some years
     back, and something on very much the same lines at Munich the year
     after the Franco-Prussian War. It is one of these cases--but, hullo,
     here is Lestrade! Good-afternoon, Lestrade! You will find an extra
     tumbler upon the sideboard, and there are cigars in the box."

     The official detective was attired in a pea-jacket and cravat, which
     gave him a decidedly nautical appearance, and he carried a black
     canvas bag in his hand. With a short greeting he seated himself and
     lit the cigar which had been offered to him.

     "What's up, then?" asked Holmes with a twinkle in his eye. "You look
     dissatisfied."

     "And I feel dissatisfied. It is this infernal St. Simon marriage
     case. I can make neither head nor tail of the business."

     "Really! You surprise me."

     "Who ever heard of such a mixed affair? Every clue seems to slip
     through my fingers. I have been at work upon it all day."

     "And very wet it seems to have made you," said Holmes laying his hand
     upon the arm of the pea-jacket.

     "Yes, I have been dragging the Serpentine."

     "In heaven's name, what for?"

     "In search of the body of Lady St. Simon."

     Sherlock Holmes leaned back in his chair and laughed heartily.

     "Have you dragged the basin of Trafalgar Square fountain?" he asked.

     "Why? What do you mean?"

     "Because you have just as good a chance of finding this lady in the
     one as in the other."

     Lestrade shot an angry glance at my companion. "I suppose you know
     all about it," he snarled.

     "Well, I have only just heard the facts, but my mind is made up."

     "Oh, indeed! Then you think that the Serpentine plays no part in the
     matter?"

     "I think it very unlikely."

     "Then perhaps you will kindly explain how it is that we found this in
     it?" He opened his bag as he spoke, and tumbled onto the floor a
     wedding-dress of watered silk, a pair of white satin shoes and a
     bride's wreath and veil, all discoloured and soaked in water.
     "There," said he, putting a new wedding-ring upon the top of the
     pile. "There is a little nut for you to crack, Master Holmes."

     "Oh, indeed!" said my friend, blowing blue rings into the air.  "You
     dragged them from the Serpentine?"

     "No. They were found floating near the margin by a park-keeper. They
     have been identified as her clothes, and it seemed to me that if the
     clothes were there the body would not be far off."

     "By the same brilliant reasoning, every man's body is to be found in
     the neighbourhood of his wardrobe. And pray what did you hope to
     arrive at through this?"

     "At some evidence implicating Flora Millar in the disappearance."

     "I am afraid that you will find it difficult."

     "Are you, indeed, now?" cried Lestrade with some bitterness. "I am
     afraid, Holmes, that you are not very practical with your deductions
     and your inferences. You have made two blunders in as many minutes.
     This dress does implicate Miss Flora Millar."

     "And how?"

     "In the dress is a pocket. In the pocket is a card-case. In the
     card-case is a note. And here is the very note." He slapped it down
     upon the table in front of him. "Listen to this:

     "'You will see me when all is ready. Come at once.
     "'F.H.M.'

     Now my theory all along has been that Lady St. Simon was decoyed away
     by Flora Millar, and that she, with confederates, no doubt, was
     responsible for her disappearance. Here, signed with her initials, is
     the very note which was no doubt quietly slipped into her hand at the
     door and which lured her within their reach."

     "Very good, Lestrade," said Holmes, laughing. "You really are very
     fine indeed. Let me see it." He took up the paper in a listless way,
     but his attention instantly became riveted, and he gave a little cry
     of satisfaction. "This is indeed important," said he.

     "Ha! you find it so?"

     "Extremely so. I congratulate you warmly."

     Lestrade rose in his triumph and bent his head to look. "Why," he
     shrieked, "you're looking at the wrong side!"

     "On the contrary, this is the right side."

     "The right side? You're mad! Here is the note written in pencil over
     here."

     "And over here is what appears to be the fragment of a hotel bill,
     which interests me deeply."

     "There's nothing in it. I looked at it before," said Lestrade.

     "'Oct. 4th, rooms 8s., breakfast 2s. 6d., cocktail 1s., lunch 2s.
     6d., glass sherry, 8d.' I see nothing in that."

     "Very likely not. It is most important, all the same. As to the note,
     it is important also, or at least the initials are, so I congratulate
     you again."

     "I've wasted time enough," said Lestrade, rising. "I believe in hard
     work and not in sitting by the fire spinning fine theories. Good-day,
     Mr. Holmes, and we shall see which gets to the bottom of the matter
     first." He gathered up the garments, thrust them into the bag, and
     made for the door.

     "Just one hint to you, Lestrade," drawled Holmes before his rival
     vanished; "I will tell you the true solution of the matter. Lady St.
     Simon is a myth. There is not, and there never has been, any such
     person."

     Lestrade looked sadly at my companion. Then he turned to me, tapped
     his forehead three times, shook his head solemnly, and hurried away.

     He had hardly shut the door behind him when Holmes rose to put on his
     overcoat. "There is something in what the fellow says about outdoor
     work," he remarked, "so I think, Watson, that I must leave you to
     your papers for a little."

     It was after five o'clock when Sherlock Holmes left me, but I had no
     time to be lonely, for within an hour there arrived a confectioner's
     man with a very large flat box. This he unpacked with the help of a
     youth whom he had brought with him, and presently, to my very great
     astonishment, a quite epicurean little cold supper began to be laid
     out upon our humble lodging-house mahogany. There were a couple of
     brace of cold woodcock, a pheasant, a pt?de foie gras pie with a
     group of ancient and cobwebby bottles. Having laid out all these
     luxuries, my two visitors vanished away, like the genii of the
     Arabian Nights, with no explanation save that the things had been
     paid for and were ordered to this address.

     Just before nine o'clock Sherlock Holmes stepped briskly into the
     room. His features were gravely set, but there was a light in his eye
     which made me think that he had not been disappointed in his
     conclusions.

     "They have laid the supper, then," he said, rubbing his hands.

     "You seem to expect company. They have laid for five."

     "Yes, I fancy we may have some company dropping in," said he. "I am
     surprised that Lord St. Simon has not already arrived. Ha! I fancy
     that I hear his step now upon the stairs."

     It was indeed our visitor of the afternoon who came bustling in,
     dangling his glasses more vigorously than ever, and with a very
     perturbed expression upon his aristocratic features.

     "My messenger reached you, then?" asked Holmes.

     "Yes, and I confess that the contents startled me beyond measure.
     Have you good authority for what you say?" 

     "The best possible."

     Lord St. Simon sank into a chair and passed his hand over his
     forehead.

     "What will the Duke say," he murmured, "when he hears that one of the
     family has been subjected to such humiliation?"

     "It is the purest accident. I cannot allow that there is any
     humiliation."

     "Ah, you look on these things from another standpoint."

     "I fail to see that anyone is to blame. I can hardly see how the lady
     could have acted otherwise, though her abrupt method of doing it was
     undoubtedly to be regretted. Having no mother, she had no one to
     advise her at such a crisis."

     "It was a slight, sir, a public slight," said Lord St. Simon, tapping
     his fingers upon the table.

     "You must make allowance for this poor girl, placed in so
     unprecedented a position."

     "I will make no allowance. I am very angry indeed, and I have been
     shamefully used."

     "I think that I heard a ring," said Holmes. "Yes, there are steps on
     the landing. If I cannot persuade you to take a lenient view of the
     matter, Lord St. Simon, I have brought an advocate here who may be
     more successful." He opened the door and ushered in a lady and
     gentleman. "Lord St. Simon," said he "allow me to introduce you to
     Mr. and Mrs. Francis Hay Moulton. The lady, I think, you have already
     met."

     At the sight of these newcomers our client had sprung from his seat
     and stood very erect, with his eyes cast down and his hand thrust
     into the breast of his frock-coat, a picture of offended dignity. The
     lady had taken a quick step forward and had held out her hand to him,
     but he still refused to raise his eyes. It was as well for his
     resolution, perhaps, for her pleading face was one which it was hard
     to resist.

     "You're angry, Robert," said she. "Well, I guess you have every cause
     to be."

     "Pray make no apology to me," said Lord St. Simon bitterly.

     "Oh, yes, I know that I have treated you real bad and that I should
     have spoken to you before I went; but I was kind of rattled, and from
     the time when I saw Frank here again I just didn't know what I was
     doing or saying. I only wonder I didn't fall down and do a faint
     right there before the altar."

     "Perhaps, Mrs. Moulton, you would like my friend and me to leave the
     room while you explain this matter?"

     "If I may give an opinion," remarked the strange gentleman, "we've
     had just a little too much secrecy over this business already. For my
     part, I should like all Europe and America to hear the rights of it."
     He was a small, wiry, sunburnt man, clean-shaven, with a sharp face
     and alert manner.

     "Then I'll tell our story right away," said the lady. "Frank here and
     I met in '84, in McQuire's camp, near the Rockies, where pa was
     working a claim. We were engaged to each other, Frank and I; but then
     one day father struck a rich pocket and made a pile, while poor Frank
     here had a claim that petered out and came to nothing. The richer pa
     grew the poorer was Frank; so at last pa wouldn't hear of our
     engagement lasting any longer, and he took me away to 'Frisco. Frank
     wouldn't throw up his hand, though; so he followed me there, and he
     saw me without pa knowing anything about it. It would only have made
     him mad to know, so we just fixed it all up for ourselves. Frank said
     that he would go and make his pile, too, and never come back to claim
     me until he had as much as pa. So then I promised to wait for him to
     the end of time and pledged myself not to marry anyone else while he
     lived. 'Why shouldn't we be married right away, then,' said he, 'and
     then I will feel sure of you; and I won't claim to be your husband
     until I come back?' Well, we talked it over, and he had fixed it all
     up so nicely, with a clergyman all ready in waiting, that we just did
     it right there; and then Frank went off to seek his fortune, and I
     went back to pa.

     "The next I heard of Frank was that he was in Montana, and then he
     went prospecting in Arizona, and then I heard of him from New Mexico.
     After that came a long newspaper story about how a miners' camp had
     been attacked by Apache Indians, and there was my Frank's name among
     the killed. I fainted dead away, and I was very sick for months
     after. Pa thought I had a decline and took me to half the doctors in
     'Frisco. Not a word of news came for a year and more, so that I never
     doubted that Frank was really dead. Then Lord St. Simon came to
     'Frisco, and we came to London, and a marriage was arranged, and pa
     was very pleased, but I felt all the time that no man on this earth
     would ever take the place in my heart that had been given to my poor
     Frank.

     "Still, if I had married Lord St. Simon, of course I'd have done my
     duty by him. We can't command our love, but we can our actions. I
     went to the altar with him with the intention to make him just as
     good a wife as it was in me to be. But you may imagine what I felt
     when, just as I came to the altar rails, I glanced back and saw Frank
     standing and looking at me out of the first pew. I thought it was his
     ghost at first; but when I looked again there he was still, with a
     kind of question in his eyes, as if to ask me whether I were glad or
     sorry to see him. I wonder I didn't drop. I know that everything was
     turning round, and the words of the clergyman were just like the buzz
     of a bee in my ear. I didn't know what to do. Should I stop the
     service and make a scene in the church? I glanced at him again, and
     he seemed to know what I was thinking, for he raised his finger to
     his lips to tell me to be still. Then I saw him scribble on a piece
     of paper, and I knew that he was writing me a note. As I passed his
     pew on the way out I dropped my bouquet over to him, and he slipped
     the note into my hand when he returned me the flowers. It was only a
     line asking me to join him when he made the sign to me to do so. Of
     course I never doubted for a moment that my first duty was now to
     him, and I determined to do just whatever he might direct.

     "When I got back I told my maid, who had known him in California, and
     had always been his friend. I ordered her to say nothing, but to get
     a few things packed and my ulster ready. I know I ought to have
     spoken to Lord St. Simon, but it was dreadful hard before his mother
     and all those great people. I just made up my mind to run away and
     explain afterwards. I hadn't been at the table ten minutes before I
     saw Frank out of the window at the other side of the road. He
     beckoned to me and then began walking into the Park. I slipped out,
     put on my things, and followed him. Some woman came talking something
     or other about Lord St. Simon to me--seemed to me from the little I
     heard as if he had a little secret of his own before marriage
     also--but I managed to get away from her and soon overtook Frank. We
     got into a cab together, and away we drove to some lodgings he had
     taken in Gordon Square, and that was my true wedding after all those
     years of waiting. Frank had been a prisoner among the Apaches, had
     escaped, came on to 'Frisco, found that I had given him up for dead
     and had gone to England, followed me there, and had come upon me at
     last on the very morning of my second wedding."

     "I saw it in a paper," explained the American. "It gave the name and
     the church but not where the lady lived."

     "Then we had a talk as to what we should do, and Frank was all for
     openness, but I was so ashamed of it all that I felt as if I should
     like to vanish away and never see any of them again--just sending a
     line to pa, perhaps, to show him that I was alive. It was awful to me
     to think of all those lords and ladies sitting round that
     breakfast-table and waiting for me to come back. So Frank took my
     wedding-clothes and things and made a bundle of them, so that I
     should not be traced, and dropped them away somewhere where no one
     could find them. It is likely that we should have gone on to Paris
     to-morrow, only that this good gentleman, Mr. Holmes, came round to
     us this evening, though how he found us is more than I can think, and
     he showed us very clearly and kindly that I was wrong and that Frank
     was right, and that we should be putting ourselves in the wrong if we
     were so secret. Then he offered to give us a chance of talking to
     Lord St. Simon alone, and so we came right away round to his rooms at
     once. Now, Robert, you have heard it all, and I am very sorry if I
     have given you pain, and I hope that you do not think very meanly of
     me."

     Lord St. Simon had by no means relaxed his rigid attitude, but had
     listened with a frowning brow and a compressed lip to this long
     narrative.

     "Excuse me," he said, "but it is not my custom to discuss my most
     intimate personal affairs in this public manner."

     "Then you won't forgive me? You won't shake hands before I go?"

     "Oh, certainly, if it would give you any pleasure." He put out his
     hand and coldly grasped that which she extended to him.

     "I had hoped," suggested Holmes, "that you would have joined us in a
     friendly supper."

     "I think that there you ask a little too much," responded his
     Lordship. "I may be forced to acquiesce in these recent developments,
     but I can hardly be expected to make merry over them. I think that
     with your permission I will now wish you all a very good-night." He
     included us all in a sweeping bow and stalked out of the room.

     "Then I trust that you at least will honour me with your company,"
     said Sherlock Holmes. "It is always a joy to meet an American, Mr.
     Moulton, for I am one of those who believe that the folly of a
     monarch and the blundering of a minister in far-gone years will not
     prevent our children from being some day citizens of the same
     world-wide country under a flag which shall be a quartering of the
     Union Jack with the Stars and Stripes."

     "The case has been an interesting one," remarked Holmes when our
     visitors had left us, "because it serves to show very clearly how
     simple the explanation may be of an affair which at first sight seems
     to be almost inexplicable. Nothing could be more natural than the
     sequence of events as narrated by this lady, and nothing stranger
     than the result when viewed, for instance, by Mr. Lestrade of
     Scotland Yard."

     "You were not yourself at fault at all, then?"

     "From the first, two facts were very obvious to me, the one that the
     lady had been quite willing to undergo the wedding ceremony, the
     other that she had repented of it within a few minutes of returning
     home. Obviously something had occurred during the morning, then, to
     cause her to change her mind. What could that something be? She could
     not have spoken to anyone when she was out, for she had been in the
     company of the bridegroom. Had she seen someone, then? If she had, it
     must be someone from America because she had spent so short a time in
     this country that she could hardly have allowed anyone to acquire so
     deep an influence over her that the mere sight of him would induce
     her to change her plans so completely. You see we have already
     arrived, by a process of exclusion, at the idea that she might have
     seen an American. Then who could this American be, and why should he
     possess so much influence over her? It might be a lover; it might be
     a husband. Her young womanhood had, I knew, been spent in rough
     scenes and under strange conditions. So far I had got before I ever
     heard Lord St. Simon's narrative. When he told us of a man in a pew,
     of the change in the bride's manner, of so transparent a device for
     obtaining a note as the dropping of a bouquet, of her resort to her
     confidential maid, and of her very significant allusion to
     claim-jumping--which in miners' parlance means taking possession of
     that which another person has a prior claim to--the whole situation
     became absolutely clear. She had gone off with a man, and the man was
     either a lover or was a previous husband--the chances being in favour
     of the latter."

     "And how in the world did you find them?"

     "It might have been difficult, but friend Lestrade held information
     in his hands the value of which he did not himself know. The initials
     were, of course, of the highest importance, but more valuable still
     was it to know that within a week he had settled his bill at one of
     the most select London hotels."

     "How did you deduce the select?"

     "By the select prices. Eight shillings for a bed and eightpence for a
     glass of sherry pointed to one of the most expensive hotels. There
     are not many in London which charge at that rate. In the second one
     which I visited in Northumberland Avenue, I learned by an inspection
     of the book that Francis H. Moulton, an American gentleman, had left
     only the day before, and on looking over the entries against him, I
     came upon the very items which I had seen in the duplicate bill. His
     letters were to be forwarded to 226 Gordon Square; so thither I
     travelled, and being fortunate enough to find the loving couple at
     home, I ventured to give them some paternal advice and to point out
     to them that it would be better in every way that they should make
     their position a little clearer both to the general public and to
     Lord St. Simon in particular. I invited them to meet him here, and,
     as you see, I made him keep the appointment."

     "But with no very good result," I remarked. "His conduct was
     certainly not very gracious."

     "Ah, Watson," said Holmes, smiling, "perhaps you would not be very
     gracious either, if, after all the trouble of wooing and wedding, you
     found yourself deprived in an instant of wife and of fortune. I think
     that we may judge Lord St. Simon very mercifully and thank our stars
     that we are never likely to find ourselves in the same position. Draw
     your chair up and hand me my violin, for the only problem we have
     still to solve is how to while away these bleak autumnal evenings."






                       THE ADVENTURE OF THE BERYL CORONET

     "Holmes," said I as I stood one morning in our bow-window looking
     down the street, "here is a madman coming along. It seems rather sad
     that his relatives should allow him to come out alone."

     My friend rose lazily from his armchair and stood with his hands in
     the pockets of his dressing-gown, looking over my shoulder. It was a
     bright, crisp February morning, and the snow of the day before still
     lay deep upon the ground, shimmering brightly in the wintry sun. Down
     the centre of Baker Street it had been ploughed into a brown crumbly
     band by the traffic, but at either side and on the heaped-up edges of
     the foot-paths it still lay as white as when it fell. The grey
     pavement had been cleaned and scraped, but was still dangerously
     slippery, so that there were fewer passengers than usual. Indeed,
     from the direction of the Metropolitan Station no one was coming save
     the single gentleman whose eccentric conduct had drawn my attention.

     He was a man of about fifty, tall, portly, and imposing, with a
     massive, strongly marked face and a commanding figure. He was dressed
     in a sombre yet rich style, in black frock-coat, shining hat, neat
     brown gaiters, and well-cut pearl-grey trousers. Yet his actions were
     in absurd contrast to the dignity of his dress and features, for he
     was running hard, with occasional little springs, such as a weary man
     gives who is little accustomed to set any tax upon his legs. As he
     ran he jerked his hands up and down, waggled his head, and writhed
     his face into the most extraordinary contortions.

     "What on earth can be the matter with him?" I asked. "He is looking
     up at the numbers of the houses."

     "I believe that he is coming here," said Holmes, rubbing his hands.

     "Here?"

     "Yes; I rather think he is coming to consult me professionally. I
     think that I recognise the symptoms. Ha! did I not tell you?" As he
     spoke, the man, puffing and blowing, rushed at our door and pulled at
     our bell until the whole house resounded with the clanging.

     A few moments later he was in our room, still puffing, still
     gesticulating, but with so fixed a look of grief and despair in his
     eyes that our smiles were turned in an instant to horror and pity.
     For a while he could not get his words out, but swayed his body and
     plucked at his hair like one who has been driven to the extreme
     limits of his reason. Then, suddenly springing to his feet, he beat
     his head against the wall with such force that we both rushed upon
     him and tore him away to the centre of the room. Sherlock Holmes
     pushed him down into the easy-chair and, sitting beside him, patted
     his hand and chatted with him in the easy, soothing tones which he
     knew so well how to employ.

     "You have come to me to tell your story, have you not?" said he. "You
     are fatigued with your haste. Pray wait until you have recovered
     yourself, and then I shall be most happy to look into any little
     problem which you may submit to me."

     The man sat for a minute or more with a heaving chest, fighting
     against his emotion. Then he passed his handkerchief over his brow,
     set his lips tight, and turned his face towards us.

     "No doubt you think me mad?" said he.

     "I see that you have had some great trouble," responded Holmes.

     "God knows I have!--a trouble which is enough to unseat my reason, so
     sudden and so terrible is it. Public disgrace I might have faced,
     although I am a man whose character has never yet borne a stain.
     Private affliction also is the lot of every man; but the two coming
     together, and in so frightful a form, have been enough to shake my
     very soul. Besides, it is not I alone. The very noblest in the land
     may suffer unless some way be found out of this horrible affair."

     "Pray compose yourself, sir," said Holmes, "and let me have a clear
     account of who you are and what it is that has befallen you."

     "My name," answered our visitor, "is probably familiar to your ears.
     I am Alexander Holder, of the banking firm of Holder & Stevenson, of
     Threadneedle Street."

     The name was indeed well known to us as belonging to the senior
     partner in the second largest private banking concern in the City of
     London. What could have happened, then, to bring one of the foremost
     citizens of London to this most pitiable pass? We waited, all
     curiosity, until with another effort he braced himself to tell his
     story.

     "I feel that time is of value," said he; "that is why I hastened here
     when the police inspector suggested that I should secure your
     co-operation. I came to Baker Street by the Underground and hurried
     from there on foot, for the cabs go slowly through this snow. That is
     why I was so out of breath, for I am a man who takes very little
     exercise. I feel better now, and I will put the facts before you as
     shortly and yet as clearly as I can.

     "It is, of course, well known to you that in a successful banking
     business as much depends upon our being able to find remunerative
     investments for our funds as upon our increasing our connection and
     the number of our depositors. One of our most lucrative means of
     laying out money is in the shape of loans, where the security is
     unimpeachable. We have done a good deal in this direction during the
     last few years, and there are many noble families to whom we have
     advanced large sums upon the security of their pictures, libraries,
     or plate.

     "Yesterday morning I was seated in my office at the bank when a card
     was brought in to me by one of the clerks. I started when I saw the
     name, for it was that of none other than--well, perhaps even to you I
     had better say no more than that it was a name which is a household
     word all over the earth--one of the highest, noblest, most exalted
     names in England. I was overwhelmed by the honour and attempted, when
     he entered, to say so, but he plunged at once into business with the
     air of a man who wishes to hurry quickly through a disagreeable task.

     "'Mr. Holder,' said he, 'I have been informed that you are in the
     habit of advancing money.'

     "'The firm does so when the security is good.' I answered.

     "'It is absolutely essential to me,' said he, 'that I should have
     ?0,000 at once. I could, of course, borrow so trifling a sum ten
     times over from my friends, but I much prefer to make it a matter of
     business and to carry out that business myself. In my position you
     can readily understand that it is unwise to place one's self under
     obligations.'

     "'For how long, may I ask, do you want this sum?' I asked.

     "'Next Monday I have a large sum due to me, and I shall then most
     certainly repay what you advance, with whatever interest you think it
     right to charge. But it is very essential to me that the money should
     be paid at once.'

     "'I should be happy to advance it without further parley from my own
     private purse,' said I, 'were it not that the strain would be rather
     more than it could bear. If, on the other hand, I am to do it in the
     name of the firm, then in justice to my partner I must insist that,
     even in your case, every businesslike precaution should be taken.'

     "'I should much prefer to have it so,' said he, raising up a square,
     black morocco case which he had laid beside his chair.  'You have
     doubtless heard of the Beryl Coronet?'

     "'One of the most precious public possessions of the empire,' said I.

     "'Precisely.' He opened the case, and there, imbedded in soft,
     flesh-coloured velvet, lay the magnificent piece of jewellery which
     he had named. 'There are thirty-nine enormous beryls,' said he, 'and
     the price of the gold chasing is incalculable. The lowest estimate
     would put the worth of the coronet at double the sum which I have
     asked. I am prepared to leave it with you as my security.'

     "I took the precious case into my hands and looked in some perplexity
     from it to my illustrious client.

     "'You doubt its value?' he asked.

     "'Not at all. I only doubt--'

     "'The propriety of my leaving it. You may set your mind at rest about
     that. I should not dream of doing so were it not absolutely certain
     that I should be able in four days to reclaim it. It is a pure matter
     of form. Is the security sufficient?'

     "'Ample.'

     "'You understand, Mr. Holder, that I am giving you a strong proof of
     the confidence which I have in you, founded upon all that I have
     heard of you. I rely upon you not only to be discreet and to refrain
     from all gossip upon the matter but, above all, to preserve this
     coronet with every possible precaution because I need not say that a
     great public scandal would be caused if any harm were to befall it.
     Any injury to it would be almost as serious as its complete loss, for
     there are no beryls in the world to match these, and it would be
     impossible to replace them. I leave it with you, however, with every
     confidence, and I shall call for it in person on Monday morning.'

     "Seeing that my client was anxious to leave, I said no more but,
     calling for my cashier, I ordered him to pay over fifty ?000 notes.
     When I was alone once more, however, with the precious case lying
     upon the table in front of me, I could not but think with some
     misgivings of the immense responsibility which it entailed upon me.
     There could be no doubt that, as it was a national possession, a
     horrible scandal would ensue if any misfortune should occur to it. I
     already regretted having ever consented to take charge of it.
     However, it was too late to alter the matter now, so I locked it up
     in my private safe and turned once more to my work.

     "When evening came I felt that it would be an imprudence to leave so
     precious a thing in the office behind me. Bankers' safes had been
     forced before now, and why should not mine be? If so, how terrible
     would be the position in which I should find myself! I determined,
     therefore, that for the next few days I would always carry the case
     backward and forward with me, so that it might never be really out of
     my reach. With this intention, I called a cab and drove out to my
     house at Streatham, carrying the jewel with me. I did not breathe
     freely until I had taken it upstairs and locked it in the bureau of
     my dressing-room.

     "And now a word as to my household, Mr. Holmes, for I wish you to
     thoroughly understand the situation. My groom and my page sleep out
     of the house, and may be set aside altogether. I have three
     maid-servants who have been with me a number of years and whose
     absolute reliability is quite above suspicion. Another, Lucy Parr,
     the second waiting-maid, has only been in my service a few months.
     She came with an excellent character, however, and has always given
     me satisfaction. She is a very pretty girl and has attracted admirers
     who have occasionally hung about the place. That is the only drawback
     which we have found to her, but we believe her to be a thoroughly
     good girl in every way.

     "So much for the servants. My family itself is so small that it will
     not take me long to describe it. I am a widower and have an only son,
     Arthur. He has been a disappointment to me, Mr. Holmes--a grievous
     disappointment. I have no doubt that I am myself to blame. People
     tell me that I have spoiled him. Very likely I have. When my dear
     wife died I felt that he was all I had to love. I could not bear to
     see the smile fade even for a moment from his face. I have never
     denied him a wish. Perhaps it would have been better for both of us
     had I been sterner, but I meant it for the best.

     "It was naturally my intention that he should succeed me in my
     business, but he was not of a business turn. He was wild, wayward,
     and, to speak the truth, I could not trust him in the handling of
     large sums of money. When he was young he became a member of an
     aristocratic club, and there, having charming manners, he was soon
     the intimate of a number of men with long purses and expensive
     habits. He learned to play heavily at cards and to squander money on
     the turf, until he had again and again to come to me and implore me
     to give him an advance upon his allowance, that he might settle his
     debts of honour. He tried more than once to break away from the
     dangerous company which he was keeping, but each time the influence
     of his friend, Sir George Burnwell, was enough to draw him back
     again.

     "And, indeed, I could not wonder that such a man as Sir George
     Burnwell should gain an influence over him, for he has frequently
     brought him to my house, and I have found myself that I could hardly
     resist the fascination of his manner. He is older than Arthur, a man
     of the world to his finger-tips, one who had been everywhere, seen
     everything, a brilliant talker, and a man of great personal beauty.
     Yet when I think of him in cold blood, far away from the glamour of
     his presence, I am convinced from his cynical speech and the look
     which I have caught in his eyes that he is one who should be deeply
     distrusted. So I think, and so, too, thinks my little Mary, who has a
     woman's quick insight into character.

     "And now there is only she to be described. She is my niece; but when
     my brother died five years ago and left her alone in the world I
     adopted her, and have looked upon her ever since as my daughter. She
     is a sunbeam in my house--sweet, loving, beautiful, a wonderful
     manager and housekeeper, yet as tender and quiet and gentle as a
     woman could be. She is my right hand. I do not know what I could do
     without her. In only one matter has she ever gone against my wishes.
     Twice my boy has asked her to marry him, for he loves her devotedly,
     but each time she has refused him. I think that if anyone could have
     drawn him into the right path it would have been she, and that his
     marriage might have changed his whole life; but now, alas! it is too
     late--forever too late!

     "Now, Mr. Holmes, you know the people who live under my roof, and I
     shall continue with my miserable story.

     "When we were taking coffee in the drawing-room that night after
     dinner, I told Arthur and Mary my experience, and of the precious
     treasure which we had under our roof, suppressing only the name of my
     client. Lucy Parr, who had brought in the coffee, had, I am sure,
     left the room; but I cannot swear that the door was closed. Mary and
     Arthur were much interested and wished to see the famous coronet, but
     I thought it better not to disturb it.

     "'Where have you put it?' asked Arthur.

     "'In my own bureau.'

     "'Well, I hope to goodness the house won't be burgled during the
     night.' said he.

     "'It is locked up,' I answered.

     "'Oh, any old key will fit that bureau. When I was a youngster I have
     opened it myself with the key of the box-room cupboard.'

     "He often had a wild way of talking, so that I thought little of what
     he said. He followed me to my room, however, that night with a very
     grave face.

     "'Look here, dad,' said he with his eyes cast down, 'can you let me
     have ?00?'

     "'No, I cannot!' I answered sharply. 'I have been far too generous
     with you in money matters.'

     "'You have been very kind,' said he, 'but I must have this money, or
     else I can never show my face inside the club again.'

     "'And a very good thing, too!' I cried.

     "'Yes, but you would not have me leave it a dishonoured man,' said
     he. 'I could not bear the disgrace. I must raise the money in some
     way, and if you will not let me have it, then I must try other
     means.'

     "I was very angry, for this was the third demand during the month.
     'You shall not have a farthing from me,' I cried, on which he bowed
     and left the room without another word.

     "When he was gone I unlocked my bureau, made sure that my treasure
     was safe, and locked it again. Then I started to go round the house
     to see that all was secure--a duty which I usually leave to Mary but
     which I thought it well to perform myself that night. As I came down
     the stairs I saw Mary herself at the side window of the hall, which
     she closed and fastened as I approached.

     "'Tell me, dad,' said she, looking, I thought, a little disturbed,
     'did you give Lucy, the maid, leave to go out to-night?'

     "'Certainly not.'

     "'She came in just now by the back door. I have no doubt that she has
     only been to the side gate to see someone, but I think that it is
     hardly safe and should be stopped.'

     "'You must speak to her in the morning, or I will if you prefer it.
     Are you sure that everything is fastened?'

     "'Quite sure, dad.'

     "'Then, good-night.' I kissed her and went up to my bedroom again,
     where I was soon asleep.

     "I am endeavouring to tell you everything, Mr. Holmes, which may have
     any bearing upon the case, but I beg that you will question me upon
     any point which I do not make clear."

     "On the contrary, your statement is singularly lucid."

     "I come to a part of my story now in which I should wish to be
     particularly so. I am not a very heavy sleeper, and the anxiety in my
     mind tended, no doubt, to make me even less so than usual. About two
     in the morning, then, I was awakened by some sound in the house. It
     had ceased ere I was wide awake, but it had left an impression behind
     it as though a window had gently closed somewhere. I lay listening
     with all my ears. Suddenly, to my horror, there was a distinct sound
     of footsteps moving softly in the next room. I slipped out of bed,
     all palpitating with fear, and peeped round the corner of my
     dressing-room door.

     "'Arthur!' I screamed, 'you villain! you thief! How dare you touch
     that coronet?'

     "The gas was half up, as I had left it, and my unhappy boy, dressed
     only in his shirt and trousers, was standing beside the light,
     holding the coronet in his hands. He appeared to be wrenching at it,
     or bending it with all his strength. At my cry he dropped it from his
     grasp and turned as pale as death. I snatched it up and examined it.
     One of the gold corners, with three of the beryls in it, was missing.

     "'You blackguard!' I shouted, beside myself with rage. 'You have
     destroyed it! You have dishonoured me forever! Where are the jewels
     which you have stolen?'

     "'Stolen!' he cried.

     "'Yes, thief!' I roared, shaking him by the shoulder.

     "'There are none missing. There cannot be any missing,' said he.

     "'There are three missing. And you know where they are. Must I call
     you a liar as well as a thief? Did I not see you trying to tear off
     another piece?'

     "'You have called me names enough,' said he, 'I will not stand it any
     longer. I shall not say another word about this business, since you
     have chosen to insult me. I will leave your house in the morning and
     make my own way in the world.'

     "'You shall leave it in the hands of the police!' I cried half-mad
     with grief and rage. 'I shall have this matter probed to the bottom.'

     "'You shall learn nothing from me,' said he with a passion such as I
     should not have thought was in his nature. 'If you choose to call the
     police, let the police find what they can.'

     "By this time the whole house was astir, for I had raised my voice in
     my anger. Mary was the first to rush into my room, and, at the sight
     of the coronet and of Arthur's face, she read the whole story and,
     with a scream, fell down senseless on the ground. I sent the
     house-maid for the police and put the investigation into their hands
     at once. When the inspector and a constable entered the house,
     Arthur, who had stood sullenly with his arms folded, asked me whether
     it was my intention to charge him with theft. I answered that it had
     ceased to be a private matter, but had become a public one, since the
     ruined coronet was national property. I was determined that the law
     should have its way in everything.

     "'At least,' said he, 'you will not have me arrested at once. It
     would be to your advantage as well as mine if I might leave the house
     for five minutes.'

     "'That you may get away, or perhaps that you may conceal what you
     have stolen,' said I. And then, realising the dreadful position in
     which I was placed, I implored him to remember that not only my
     honour but that of one who was far greater than I was at stake; and
     that he threatened to raise a scandal which would convulse the
     nation. He might avert it all if he would but tell me what he had
     done with the three missing stones.

     "'You may as well face the matter,' said I; 'you have been caught in
     the act, and no confession could make your guilt more heinous. If you
     but make such reparation as is in your power, by telling us where the
     beryls are, all shall be forgiven and forgotten.'

     "'Keep your forgiveness for those who ask for it,' he answered,
     turning away from me with a sneer. I saw that he was too hardened for
     any words of mine to influence him. There was but one way for it. I
     called in the inspector and gave him into custody. A search was made
     at once not only of his person but of his room and of every portion
     of the house where he could possibly have concealed the gems; but no
     trace of them could be found, nor would the wretched boy open his
     mouth for all our persuasions and our threats. This morning he was
     removed to a cell, and I, after going through all the police
     formalities, have hurried round to you to implore you to use your
     skill in unravelling the matter. The police have openly confessed
     that they can at present make nothing of it. You may go to any
     expense which you think necessary. I have already offered a reward of
     ?000. My God, what shall I do! I have lost my honour, my gems, and
     my son in one night. Oh, what shall I do!"

     He put a hand on either side of his head and rocked himself to and
     fro, droning to himself like a child whose grief has got beyond
     words.

     Sherlock Holmes sat silent for some few minutes, with his brows
     knitted and his eyes fixed upon the fire.

     "Do you receive much company?" he asked.

     "None save my partner with his family and an occasional friend of
     Arthur's. Sir George Burnwell has been several times lately. No one
     else, I think."

     "Do you go out much in society?"

     "Arthur does. Mary and I stay at home. We neither of us care for it."

     "That is unusual in a young girl."

     "She is of a quiet nature. Besides, she is not so very young. She is
     four-and-twenty."

     "This matter, from what you say, seems to have been a shock to her
     also."

     "Terrible! She is even more affected than I."

     "You have neither of you any doubt as to your son's guilt?"

     "How can we have when I saw him with my own eyes with the coronet in
     his hands."

     "I hardly consider that a conclusive proof. Was the remainder of the
     coronet at all injured?"

     "Yes, it was twisted."

     "Do you not think, then, that he might have been trying to straighten
     it?"

     "God bless you! You are doing what you can for him and for me. But it
     is too heavy a task. What was he doing there at all? If his purpose
     were innocent, why did he not say so?"

     "Precisely. And if it were guilty, why did he not invent a lie? His
     silence appears to me to cut both ways. There are several singular
     points about the case. What did the police think of the noise which
     awoke you from your sleep?"

     "They considered that it might be caused by Arthur's closing his
     bedroom door."

     "A likely story! As if a man bent on felony would slam his door so as
     to wake a household. What did they say, then, of the disappearance of
     these gems?"

     "They are still sounding the planking and probing the furniture in
     the hope of finding them."

     "Have they thought of looking outside the house?"

     "Yes, they have shown extraordinary energy. The whole garden has
     already been minutely examined."

     "Now, my dear sir," said Holmes. "is it not obvious to you now that
     this matter really strikes very much deeper than either you or the
     police were at first inclined to think? It appeared to you to be a
     simple case; to me it seems exceedingly complex. Consider what is
     involved by your theory. You suppose that your son came down from his
     bed, went, at great risk, to your dressing-room, opened your bureau,
     took out your coronet, broke off by main force a small portion of it,
     went off to some other place, concealed three gems out of the
     thirty-nine, with such skill that nobody can find them, and then
     returned with the other thirty-six into the room in which he exposed
     himself to the greatest danger of being discovered. I ask you now, is
     such a theory tenable?"

     "But what other is there?" cried the banker with a gesture of
     despair. "If his motives were innocent, why does he not explain
     them?"

     "It is our task to find that out," replied Holmes; "so now, if you
     please, Mr. Holder, we will set off for Streatham together, and
     devote an hour to glancing a little more closely into details."

     My friend insisted upon my accompanying them in their expedition,
     which I was eager enough to do, for my curiosity and sympathy were
     deeply stirred by the story to which we had listened. I confess that
     the guilt of the banker's son appeared to me to be as obvious as it
     did to his unhappy father, but still I had such faith in Holmes'
     judgment that I felt that there must be some grounds for hope as long
     as he was dissatisfied with the accepted explanation. He hardly spoke
     a word the whole way out to the southern suburb, but sat with his
     chin upon his breast and his hat drawn over his eyes, sunk in the
     deepest thought. Our client appeared to have taken fresh heart at the
     little glimpse of hope which had been presented to him, and he even
     broke into a desultory chat with me over his business affairs. A
     short railway journey and a shorter walk brought us to Fairbank, the
     modest residence of the great financier.

     Fairbank was a good-sized square house of white stone, standing back
     a little from the road. A double carriage-sweep, with a snow-clad
     lawn, stretched down in front to two large iron gates which closed
     the entrance. On the right side was a small wooden thicket, which led
     into a narrow path between two neat hedges stretching from the road
     to the kitchen door, and forming the tradesmen's entrance. On the
     left ran a lane which led to the stables, and was not itself within
     the grounds at all, being a public, though little used, thoroughfare.
     Holmes left us standing at the door and walked slowly all round the
     house, across the front, down the tradesmen's path, and so round by
     the garden behind into the stable lane. So long was he that Mr.
     Holder and I went into the dining-room and waited by the fire until
     he should return. We were sitting there in silence when the door
     opened and a young lady came in. She was rather above the middle
     height, slim, with dark hair and eyes, which seemed the darker
     against the absolute pallor of her skin. I do not think that I have
     ever seen such deadly paleness in a woman's face. Her lips, too, were
     bloodless, but her eyes were flushed with crying. As she swept
     silently into the room she impressed me with a greater sense of grief
     than the banker had done in the morning, and it was the more striking
     in her as she was evidently a woman of strong character, with immense
     capacity for self-restraint. Disregarding my presence, she went
     straight to her uncle and passed her hand over his head with a sweet
     womanly caress.

     "You have given orders that Arthur should be liberated, have you not,
     dad?" she asked.

     "No, no, my girl, the matter must be probed to the bottom."

     "But I am so sure that he is innocent. You know what woman's
     instincts are. I know that he has done no harm and that you will be
     sorry for having acted so harshly."

     "Why is he silent, then, if he is innocent?"

     "Who knows? Perhaps because he was so angry that you should suspect
     him."

     "How could I help suspecting him, when I actually saw him with the
     coronet in his hand?"

     "Oh, but he had only picked it up to look at it. Oh, do, do take my
     word for it that he is innocent. Let the matter drop and say no more.
     It is so dreadful to think of our dear Arthur in a prison!"

     "I shall never let it drop until the gems are found--never, Mary!
     Your affection for Arthur blinds you as to the awful consequences to
     me. Far from hushing the thing up, I have brought a gentleman down
     from London to inquire more deeply into it."

     "This gentleman?" she asked, facing round to me.

     "No, his friend. He wished us to leave him alone. He is round in the
     stable lane now."

     "The stable lane?" She raised her dark eyebrows. "What can he hope to
     find there? Ah! this, I suppose, is he. I trust, sir, that you will
     succeed in proving, what I feel sure is the truth, that my cousin
     Arthur is innocent of this crime."

     "I fully share your opinion, and I trust, with you, that we may prove
     it," returned Holmes, going back to the mat to knock the snow from
     his shoes. "I believe I have the honour of addressing Miss Mary
     Holder. Might I ask you a question or two?"

     "Pray do, sir, if it may help to clear this horrible affair up."

     "You heard nothing yourself last night?"

     "Nothing, until my uncle here began to speak loudly. I heard that,
     and I came down."

     "You shut up the windows and doors the night before. Did you fasten
     all the windows?"

     "Yes."

     "Were they all fastened this morning?"

     "Yes."

     "You have a maid who has a sweetheart? I think that you remarked to
     your uncle last night that she had been out to see him?"

     "Yes, and she was the girl who waited in the drawing-room, and who
     may have heard uncle's remarks about the coronet."

     "I see. You infer that she may have gone out to tell her sweetheart,
     and that the two may have planned the robbery."

     "But what is the good of all these vague theories," cried the banker
     impatiently, "when I have told you that I saw Arthur with the coronet
     in his hands?"

     "Wait a little, Mr. Holder. We must come back to that. About this
     girl, Miss Holder. You saw her return by the kitchen door, I
     presume?"

     "Yes; when I went to see if the door was fastened for the night I met
     her slipping in. I saw the man, too, in the gloom."

     "Do you know him?"

     "Oh, yes! he is the green-grocer who brings our vegetables round. 
     His name is Francis Prosper."

     "He stood," said Holmes, "to the left of the door--that is to say,
     farther up the path than is necessary to reach the door?"

     "Yes, he did."

     "And he is a man with a wooden leg?"

     Something like fear sprang up in the young lady's expressive black
     eyes. "Why, you are like a magician," said she. "How do you know
     that?" She smiled, but there was no answering smile in Holmes' thin,
     eager face.

     "I should be very glad now to go upstairs," said he. "I shall
     probably wish to go over the outside of the house again. Perhaps I
     had better take a look at the lower windows before I go up."

     He walked swiftly round from one to the other, pausing only at the
     large one which looked from the hall onto the stable lane. This he
     opened and made a very careful examination of the sill with his
     powerful magnifying lens. "Now we shall go upstairs," said he at
     last.

     The banker's dressing-room was a plainly furnished little chamber,
     with a grey carpet, a large bureau, and a long mirror. Holmes went to
     the bureau first and looked hard at the lock.

     "Which key was used to open it?" he asked.

     "That which my son himself indicated--that of the cupboard of the
     lumber-room."

     "Have you it here?"

     "That is it on the dressing-table."

     Sherlock Holmes took it up and opened the bureau.

     "It is a noiseless lock," said he. "It is no wonder that it did not
     wake you. This case, I presume, contains the coronet. We must have a
     look at it." He opened the case, and taking out the diadem he laid it
     upon the table. It was a magnificent specimen of the jeweller's art,
     and the thirty-six stones were the finest that I have ever seen. At
     one side of the coronet was a cracked edge, where a corner holding
     three gems had been torn away.

     "Now, Mr. Holder," said Holmes, "here is the corner which corresponds
     to that which has been so unfortunately lost. Might I beg that you
     will break it off."

     The banker recoiled in horror. "I should not dream of trying," said
     he.

     "Then I will." Holmes suddenly bent his strength upon it, but without
     result. "I feel it give a little," said he; "but, though I am
     exceptionally strong in the fingers, it would take me all my time to
     break it. An ordinary man could not do it. Now, what do you think
     would happen if I did break it, Mr. Holder? There would be a noise
     like a pistol shot. Do you tell me that all this happened within a
     few yards of your bed and that you heard nothing of it?"

     "I do not know what to think. It is all dark to me."

     "But perhaps it may grow lighter as we go. What do you think, Miss
     Holder?"

     "I confess that I still share my uncle's perplexity."

     "Your son had no shoes or slippers on when you saw him?"

     "He had nothing on save only his trousers and shirt."

     "Thank you. We have certainly been favoured with extraordinary luck
     during this inquiry, and it will be entirely our own fault if we do
     not succeed in clearing the matter up. With your permission, Mr.
     Holder, I shall now continue my investigations outside."

     He went alone, at his own request, for he explained that any
     unnecessary footmarks might make his task more difficult. For an hour
     or more he was at work, returning at last with his feet heavy with
     snow and his features as inscrutable as ever.

     "I think that I have seen now all that there is to see, Mr. Holder,"
     said he; "I can serve you best by returning to my rooms."

     "But the gems, Mr. Holmes. Where are they?"

     "I cannot tell."

     The banker wrung his hands. "I shall never see them again!" he cried.
     "And my son? You give me hopes?"

     "My opinion is in no way altered."

     "Then, for God's sake, what was this dark business which was acted in
     my house last night?"

     "If you can call upon me at my Baker Street rooms to-morrow morning
     between nine and ten I shall be happy to do what I can to make it
     clearer. I understand that you give me carte blanche to act for you,
     provided only that I get back the gems, and that you place no limit
     on the sum I may draw."

     "I would give my fortune to have them back."

     "Very good. I shall look into the matter between this and then. 
     Good-bye; it is just possible that I may have to come over here again
     before evening."

     It was obvious to me that my companion's mind was now made up about
     the case, although what his conclusions were was more than I could
     even dimly imagine. Several times during our homeward journey I
     endeavoured to sound him upon the point, but he always glided away to
     some other topic, until at last I gave it over in despair. It was not
     yet three when we found ourselves in our rooms once more. He hurried
     to his chamber and was down again in a few minutes dressed as a
     common loafer. With his collar turned up, his shiny, seedy coat, his
     red cravat, and his worn boots, he was a perfect sample of the class.

     "I think that this should do," said he, glancing into the glass above
     the fireplace. "I only wish that you could come with me, Watson, but
     I fear that it won't do. I may be on the trail in this matter, or I
     may be following a will-o'-the-wisp, but I shall soon know which it
     is. I hope that I may be back in a few hours." He cut a slice of beef
     from the joint upon the sideboard, sandwiched it between two rounds
     of bread, and thrusting this rude meal into his pocket he started off
     upon his expedition.

     I had just finished my tea when he returned, evidently in excellent
     spirits, swinging an old elastic-sided boot in his hand. He chucked
     it down into a corner and helped himself to a cup of tea.

     "I only looked in as I passed," said he. "I am going right on."

     "Where to?"

     "Oh, to the other side of the West End. It may be some time before I
     get back. Don't wait up for me in case I should be late."

     "How are you getting on?"

     "Oh, so so. Nothing to complain of. I have been out to Streatham
     since I saw you last, but I did not call at the house. It is a very
     sweet little problem, and I would not have missed it for a good deal.
     However, I must not sit gossiping here, but must get these
     disreputable clothes off and return to my highly respectable self."

     I could see by his manner that he had stronger reasons for
     satisfaction than his words alone would imply. His eyes twinkled, and
     there was even a touch of colour upon his sallow cheeks. He hastened
     upstairs, and a few minutes later I heard the slam of the hall door,
     which told me that he was off once more upon his congenial hunt.

     I waited until midnight, but there was no sign of his return, so I
     retired to my room. It was no uncommon thing for him to be away for
     days and nights on end when he was hot upon a scent, so that his
     lateness caused me no surprise. I do not know at what hour he came
     in, but when I came down to breakfast in the morning there he was
     with a cup of coffee in one hand and the paper in the other, as fresh
     and trim as possible.

     "You will excuse my beginning without you, Watson," said he, "but you
     remember that our client has rather an early appointment this
     morning."

     "Why, it is after nine now," I answered. "I should not be surprised
     if that were he. I thought I heard a ring."

     It was, indeed, our friend the financier. I was shocked by the change
     which had come over him, for his face which was naturally of a broad
     and massive mould, was now pinched and fallen in, while his hair
     seemed to me at least a shade whiter. He entered with a weariness and
     lethargy which was even more painful than his violence of the morning
     before, and he dropped heavily into the armchair which I pushed
     forward for him.

     "I do not know what I have done to be so severely tried," said he.
     "Only two days ago I was a happy and prosperous man, without a care
     in the world. Now I am left to a lonely and dishonoured age. One
     sorrow comes close upon the heels of another. My niece, Mary, has
     deserted me."

     "Deserted you?"

     "Yes. Her bed this morning had not been slept in, her room was empty,
     and a note for me lay upon the hall table. I had said to her last
     night, in sorrow and not in anger, that if she had married my boy all
     might have been well with him. Perhaps it was thoughtless of me to
     say so. It is to that remark that she refers in this note:

     "'My dearest Uncle:
     "'I feel that I have brought trouble upon you, and that if I had
     acted differently this terrible misfortune might never have occurred.
     I cannot, with this thought in my mind, ever again be happy under
     your roof, and I feel that I must leave you forever. Do not worry
     about my future, for that is provided for; and, above all, do not
     search for me, for it will be fruitless labour and an ill-service to
     me. In life or in death, I am ever
     "'Your loving
     "'Mary.'

     "What could she mean by that note, Mr. Holmes? Do you think it points
     to suicide?"

     "No, no, nothing of the kind. It is perhaps the best possible
     solution. I trust, Mr. Holder, that you are nearing the end of your
     troubles."

     "Ha! You say so! You have heard something, Mr. Holmes; you have
     learned something! Where are the gems?"

     "You would not think ?000 pounds apiece an excessive sum for them?"

     "I would pay ten."

     "That would be unnecessary. Three thousand will cover the matter. And
     there is a little reward, I fancy. Have you your check-book?  Here is
     a pen. Better make it out for ?000."

     With a dazed face the banker made out the required check. Holmes
     walked over to his desk, took out a little triangular piece of gold
     with three gems in it, and threw it down upon the table.

     With a shriek of joy our client clutched it up.

     "You have it!" he gasped. "I am saved! I am saved!"

     The reaction of joy was as passionate as his grief had been, and he
     hugged his recovered gems to his bosom.

     "There is one other thing you owe, Mr. Holder," said Sherlock Holmes
     rather sternly.

     "Owe!" He caught up a pen. "Name the sum, and I will pay it."

     "No, the debt is not to me. You owe a very humble apology to that
     noble lad, your son, who has carried himself in this matter as I
     should be proud to see my own son do, should I ever chance to have
     one."

     "Then it was not Arthur who took them?"

     "I told you yesterday, and I repeat to-day, that it was not."

     "You are sure of it! Then let us hurry to him at once to let him know
     that the truth is known."

     "He knows it already. When I had cleared it all up I had an interview
     with him, and finding that he would not tell me the story, I told it
     to him, on which he had to confess that I was right and to add the
     very few details which were not yet quite clear to me. Your news of
     this morning, however, may open his lips."

     "For heaven's sake, tell me, then, what is this extraordinary
     mystery!"

     "I will do so, and I will show you the steps by which I reached it.
     And let me say to you, first, that which it is hardest for me to say
     and for you to hear: there has been an understanding between Sir
     George Burnwell and your niece Mary. They have now fled together."

     "My Mary? Impossible!"

     "It is unfortunately more than possible; it is certain. Neither you
     nor your son knew the true character of this man when you admitted
     him into your family circle. He is one of the most dangerous men in
     England--a ruined gambler, an absolutely desperate villain, a man
     without heart or conscience. Your niece knew nothing of such men.
     When he breathed his vows to her, as he had done to a hundred before
     her, she flattered herself that she alone had touched his heart. The
     devil knows best what he said, but at least she became his tool and
     was in the habit of seeing him nearly every evening."

     "I cannot, and I will not, believe it!" cried the banker with an
     ashen face.

     "I will tell you, then, what occurred in your house last night. Your
     niece, when you had, as she thought, gone to your room, slipped down
     and talked to her lover through the window which leads into the
     stable lane. His footmarks had pressed right through the snow, so
     long had he stood there. She told him of the coronet. His wicked lust
     for gold kindled at the news, and he bent her to his will. I have no
     doubt that she loved you, but there are women in whom the love of a
     lover extinguishes all other loves, and I think that she must have
     been one. She had hardly listened to his instructions when she saw
     you coming downstairs, on which she closed the window rapidly and
     told you about one of the servants' escapade with her wooden-legged
     lover, which was all perfectly true.

     "Your boy, Arthur, went to bed after his interview with you but he
     slept badly on account of his uneasiness about his club debts. In the
     middle of the night he heard a soft tread pass his door, so he rose
     and, looking out, was surprised to see his cousin walking very
     stealthily along the passage until she disappeared into your
     dressing-room. Petrified with astonishment, the lad slipped on some
     clothes and waited there in the dark to see what would come of this
     strange affair. Presently she emerged from the room again, and in the
     light of the passage-lamp your son saw that she carried the precious
     coronet in her hands. She passed down the stairs, and he, thrilling
     with horror, ran along and slipped behind the curtain near your door,
     whence he could see what passed in the hall beneath. He saw her
     stealthily open the window, hand out the coronet to someone in the
     gloom, and then closing it once more hurry back to her room, passing
     quite close to where he stood hid behind the curtain.

     "As long as she was on the scene he could not take any action without
     a horrible exposure of the woman whom he loved. But the instant that
     she was gone he realised how crushing a misfortune this would be for
     you, and how all-important it was to set it right. He rushed down,
     just as he was, in his bare feet, opened the window, sprang out into
     the snow, and ran down the lane, where he could see a dark figure in
     the moonlight. Sir George Burnwell tried to get away, but Arthur
     caught him, and there was a struggle between them, your lad tugging
     at one side of the coronet, and his opponent at the other. In the
     scuffle, your son struck Sir George and cut him over the eye. Then
     something suddenly snapped, and your son, finding that he had the
     coronet in his hands, rushed back, closed the window, ascended to
     your room, and had just observed that the coronet had been twisted in
     the struggle and was endeavouring to straighten it when you appeared
     upon the scene."

     "Is it possible?" gasped the banker.

     "You then roused his anger by calling him names at a moment when he
     felt that he had deserved your warmest thanks. He could not explain
     the true state of affairs without betraying one who certainly
     deserved little enough consideration at his hands. He took the more
     chivalrous view, however, and preserved her secret."

     "And that was why she shrieked and fainted when she saw the coronet,"
     cried Mr. Holder. "Oh, my God! what a blind fool I have been! And his
     asking to be allowed to go out for five minutes! The dear fellow
     wanted to see if the missing piece were at the scene of the struggle.
     How cruelly I have misjudged him!"

     "When I arrived at the house," continued Holmes, "I at once went very
     carefully round it to observe if there were any traces in the snow
     which might help me. I knew that none had fallen since the evening
     before, and also that there had been a strong frost to preserve
     impressions. I passed along the tradesmen's path, but found it all
     trampled down and indistinguishable. Just beyond it, however, at the
     far side of the kitchen door, a woman had stood and talked with a
     man, whose round impressions on one side showed that he had a wooden
     leg. I could even tell that they had been disturbed, for the woman
     had run back swiftly to the door, as was shown by the deep toe and
     light heel marks, while Wooden-leg had waited a little, and then had
     gone away. I thought at the time that this might be the maid and her
     sweetheart, of whom you had already spoken to me, and inquiry showed
     it was so. I passed round the garden without seeing anything more
     than random tracks, which I took to be the police; but when I got
     into the stable lane a very long and complex story was written in the
     snow in front of me.

     "There was a double line of tracks of a booted man, and a second
     double line which I saw with delight belonged to a man with naked
     feet. I was at once convinced from what you had told me that the
     latter was your son. The first had walked both ways, but the other
     had run swiftly, and as his tread was marked in places over the
     depression of the boot, it was obvious that he had passed after the
     other. I followed them up and found they led to the hall window,
     where Boots had worn all the snow away while waiting. Then I walked
     to the other end, which was a hundred yards or more down the lane. I
     saw where Boots had faced round, where the snow was cut up as though
     there had been a struggle, and, finally, where a few drops of blood
     had fallen, to show me that I was not mistaken. Boots had then run
     down the lane, and another little smudge of blood showed that it was
     he who had been hurt. When he came to the highroad at the other end,
     I found that the pavement had been cleared, so there was an end to
     that clue.

     "On entering the house, however, I examined, as you remember, the
     sill and framework of the hall window with my lens, and I could at
     once see that someone had passed out. I could distinguish the outline
     of an instep where the wet foot had been placed in coming in. I was
     then beginning to be able to form an opinion as to what had occurred.
     A man had waited outside the window; someone had brought the gems;
     the deed had been overseen by your son; he had pursued the thief; had
     struggled with him; they had each tugged at the coronet, their united
     strength causing injuries which neither alone could have effected. He
     had returned with the prize, but had left a fragment in the grasp of
     his opponent. So far I was clear. The question now was, who was the
     man and who was it brought him the coronet?

     "It is an old maxim of mine that when you have excluded the
     impossible, whatever remains, however improbable, must be the truth.
     Now, I knew that it was not you who had brought it down, so there
     only remained your niece and the maids. But if it were the maids, why
     should your son allow himself to be accused in their place? There
     could be no possible reason. As he loved his cousin, however, there
     was an excellent explanation why he should retain her secret--the
     more so as the secret was a disgraceful one. When I remembered that
     you had seen her at that window, and how she had fainted on seeing
     the coronet again, my conjecture became a certainty.

     "And who could it be who was her confederate? A lover evidently, for
     who else could outweigh the love and gratitude which she must feel to
     you? I knew that you went out little, and that your circle of friends
     was a very limited one. But among them was Sir George Burnwell. I had
     heard of him before as being a man of evil reputation among women. It
     must have been he who wore those boots and retained the missing gems.
     Even though he knew that Arthur had discovered him, he might still
     flatter himself that he was safe, for the lad could not say a word
     without compromising his own family.

     "Well, your own good sense will suggest what measures I took next. I
     went in the shape of a loafer to Sir George's house, managed to pick
     up an acquaintance with his valet, learned that his master had cut
     his head the night before, and, finally, at the expense of six
     shillings, made all sure by buying a pair of his cast-off shoes. With
     these I journeyed down to Streatham and saw that they exactly fitted
     the tracks."

     "I saw an ill-dressed vagabond in the lane yesterday evening," said
     Mr. Holder.

     "Precisely. It was I. I found that I had my man, so I came home and
     changed my clothes. It was a delicate part which I had to play then,
     for I saw that a prosecution must be avoided to avert scandal, and I
     knew that so astute a villain would see that our hands were tied in
     the matter. I went and saw him. At first, of course, he denied
     everything. But when I gave him every particular that had occurred,
     he tried to bluster and took down a life-preserver from the wall. I
     knew my man, however, and I clapped a pistol to his head before he
     could strike. Then he became a little more reasonable. I told him
     that we would give him a price for the stones he held--?000 apiece.
     That brought out the first signs of grief that he had shown. 'Why,
     dash it all!' said he, 'I've let them go at six hundred for the
     three!' I soon managed to get the address of the receiver who had
     them, on promising him that there would be no prosecution. Off I set
     to him, and after much chaffering I got our stones at 1000 pounds
     apiece. Then I looked in upon your son, told him that all was right,
     and eventually got to my bed about two o'clock, after what I may call
     a really hard day's work."

     "A day which has saved England from a great public scandal," said the
     banker, rising. "Sir, I cannot find words to thank you, but you shall
     not find me ungrateful for what you have done. Your skill has indeed
     exceeded all that I have heard of it. And now I must fly to my dear
     boy to apologise to him for the wrong which I have done him. As to
     what you tell me of poor Mary, it goes to my very heart. Not even
     your skill can inform me where she is now."

     "I think that we may safely say," returned Holmes, "that she is
     wherever Sir George Burnwell is. It is equally certain, too, that
     whatever her sins are, they will soon receive a more than sufficient
     punishment."






                       THE ADVENTURE OF THE COPPER BEECHES

     "To the man who loves art for its own sake," remarked Sherlock
     Holmes, tossing aside the advertisement sheet of the Daily Telegraph,
     "it is frequently in its least important and lowliest manifestations
     that the keenest pleasure is to be derived. It is pleasant to me to
     observe, Watson, that you have so far grasped this truth that in
     these little records of our cases which you have been good enough to
     draw up, and, I am bound to say, occasionally to embellish, you have
     given prominence not so much to the many causes clbres and
     sensational trials in which I have figured but rather to those
     incidents which may have been trivial in themselves, but which have
     given room for those faculties of deduction and of logical synthesis
     which I have made my special province."

     "And yet," said I, smiling, "I cannot quite hold myself absolved from
     the charge of sensationalism which has been urged against my
     records."

     "You have erred, perhaps," he observed, taking up a glowing cinder
     with the tongs and lighting with it the long cherry-wood pipe which
     was wont to replace his clay when he was in a disputatious rather
     than a meditative mood--"you have erred perhaps in attempting to put
     colour and life into each of your statements instead of confining
     yourself to the task of placing upon record that severe reasoning
     from cause to effect which is really the only notable feature about
     the thing."

     "It seems to me that I have done you full justice in the matter," I
     remarked with some coldness, for I was repelled by the egotism which
     I had more than once observed to be a strong factor in my friend's
     singular character.

     "No, it is not selfishness or conceit," said he, answering, as was
     his wont, my thoughts rather than my words. "If I claim full justice
     for my art, it is because it is an impersonal thing--a thing beyond
     myself. Crime is common. Logic is rare. Therefore it is upon the
     logic rather than upon the crime that you should dwell. You have
     degraded what should have been a course of lectures into a series of
     tales."

     It was a cold morning of the early spring, and we sat after breakfast
     on either side of a cheery fire in the old room at Baker Street. A
     thick fog rolled down between the lines of dun-coloured houses, and
     the opposing windows loomed like dark, shapeless blurs through the
     heavy yellow wreaths. Our gas was lit and shone on the white cloth
     and glimmer of china and metal, for the table had not been cleared
     yet. Sherlock Holmes had been silent all the morning, dipping
     continuously into the advertisement columns of a succession of papers
     until at last, having apparently given up his search, he had emerged
     in no very sweet temper to lecture me upon my literary shortcomings.

     "At the same time," he remarked after a pause, during which he had
     sat puffing at his long pipe and gazing down into the fire, "you can
     hardly be open to a charge of sensationalism, for out of these cases
     which you have been so kind as to interest yourself in, a fair
     proportion do not treat of crime, in its legal sense, at all. The
     small matter in which I endeavoured to help the King of Bohemia, the
     singular experience of Miss Mary Sutherland, the problem connected
     with the man with the twisted lip, and the incident of the noble
     bachelor, were all matters which are outside the pale of the law. But
     in avoiding the sensational, I fear that you may have bordered on the
     trivial."

     "The end may have been so," I answered, "but the methods I hold to
     have been novel and of interest."

     "Pshaw, my dear fellow, what do the public, the great unobservant
     public, who could hardly tell a weaver by his tooth or a compositor
     by his left thumb, care about the finer shades of analysis and
     deduction! But, indeed, if you are trivial. I cannot blame you, for
     the days of the great cases are past. Man, or at least criminal man,
     has lost all enterprise and originality. As to my own little
     practice, it seems to be degenerating into an agency for recovering
     lost lead pencils and giving advice to young ladies from
     boarding-schools. I think that I have touched bottom at last,
     however. This note I had this morning marks my zero-point, I fancy.
     Read it!" He tossed a crumpled letter across to me.

     It was dated from Montague Place upon the preceding evening, and ran
     thus:

     Dear Mr. Holmes:
     I am very anxious to consult you as to whether I should or should not
     accept a situation which has been offered to me as governess. I shall
     call at half-past ten to-morrow if I do not inconvenience you.
     Yours faithfully,
     Violet Hunter.

     "Do you know the young lady?" I asked.

     "Not I."

     "It is half-past ten now."

     "Yes, and I have no doubt that is her ring."

     "It may turn out to be of more interest than you think. You remember
     that the affair of the blue carbuncle, which appeared to be a mere
     whim at first, developed into a serious investigation. It may be so
     in this case, also."

     "Well, let us hope so. But our doubts will very soon be solved, for
     here, unless I am much mistaken, is the person in question."

     As he spoke the door opened and a young lady entered the room. She
     was plainly but neatly dressed, with a bright, quick face, freckled
     like a plover's egg, and with the brisk manner of a woman who has had
     her own way to make in the world.

     "You will excuse my troubling you, I am sure," said she, as my
     companion rose to greet her, "but I have had a very strange
     experience, and as I have no parents or relations of any sort from
     whom I could ask advice, I thought that perhaps you would be kind
     enough to tell me what I should do."

     "Pray take a seat, Miss Hunter. I shall be happy to do anything that
     I can to serve you."

     I could see that Holmes was favourably impressed by the manner and
     speech of his new client. He looked her over in his searching
     fashion, and then composed himself, with his lids drooping and his
     finger-tips together, to listen to her story.

     "I have been a governess for five years," said she, "in the family of
     Colonel Spence Munro, but two months ago the colonel received an
     appointment at Halifax, in Nova Scotia, and took his children over to
     America with him, so that I found myself without a situation. I
     advertised, and I answered advertisements, but without success. At
     last the little money which I had saved began to run short, and I was
     at my wit's end as to what I should do.

     "There is a well-known agency for governesses in the West End called
     Westaway's, and there I used to call about once a week in order to
     see whether anything had turned up which might suit me. Westaway was
     the name of the founder of the business, but it is really managed by
     Miss Stoper. She sits in her own little office, and the ladies who
     are seeking employment wait in an anteroom, and are then shown in one
     by one, when she consults her ledgers and sees whether she has
     anything which would suit them.

     "Well, when I called last week I was shown into the little office as
     usual, but I found that Miss Stoper was not alone. A prodigiously
     stout man with a very smiling face and a great heavy chin which
     rolled down in fold upon fold over his throat sat at her elbow with a
     pair of glasses on his nose, looking very earnestly at the ladies who
     entered. As I came in he gave quite a jump in his chair and turned
     quickly to Miss Stoper.

     "'That will do,' said he; 'I could not ask for anything better.
     Capital! capital!' He seemed quite enthusiastic and rubbed his hands
     together in the most genial fashion. He was such a
     comfortable-looking man that it was quite a pleasure to look at him.

     "'You are looking for a situation, miss?' he asked.

     "'Yes, sir.'

     "'As governess?'

     "'Yes, sir.'

     "'And what salary do you ask?'

     "'I had ? a month in my last place with Colonel Spence Munro.'

     "'Oh, tut, tut! sweating--rank sweating!' he cried, throwing his fat
     hands out into the air like a man who is in a boiling passion. 'How
     could anyone offer so pitiful a sum to a lady with such attractions
     and accomplishments?'

     "'My accomplishments, sir, may be less than you imagine,' said I. 'A
     little French, a little German, music, and drawing--'

     "'Tut, tut!' he cried. 'This is all quite beside the question. The
     point is, have you or have you not the bearing and deportment of a
     lady? There it is in a nutshell. If you have not, you are not fitted
     for the rearing of a child who may some day play a considerable part
     in the history of the country. But if you have why, then, how could
     any gentleman ask you to condescend to accept anything under the
     three figures? Your salary with me, madam, would commence at ?00 a
     year.'

     "You may imagine, Mr. Holmes, that to me, destitute as I was, such an
     offer seemed almost too good to be true. The gentleman, however,
     seeing perhaps the look of incredulity upon my face, opened a
     pocket-book and took out a note.

     "'It is also my custom,' said he, smiling in the most pleasant
     fashion until his eyes were just two little shining slits amid the
     white creases of his face, 'to advance to my young ladies half their
     salary beforehand, so that they may meet any little expenses of their
     journey and their wardrobe.'

     "It seemed to me that I had never met so fascinating and so
     thoughtful a man. As I was already in debt to my tradesmen, the
     advance was a great convenience, and yet there was something
     unnatural about the whole transaction which made me wish to know a
     little more before I quite committed myself.

     "'May I ask where you live, sir?' said I.

     "'Hampshire. Charming rural place. The Copper Beeches, five miles on
     the far side of Winchester. It is the most lovely country, my dear
     young lady, and the dearest old country-house.'

     "'And my duties, sir? I should be glad to know what they would be.'

     "'One child--one dear little romper just six years old. Oh, if you
     could see him killing cockroaches with a slipper! Smack! smack!
     smack! Three gone before you could wink!' He leaned back in his chair
     and laughed his eyes into his head again.

     "I was a little startled at the nature of the child's amusement, but
     the father's laughter made me think that perhaps he was joking.

     "'My sole duties, then,' I asked, 'are to take charge of a single
     child?'

     "'No, no, not the sole, not the sole, my dear young lady,' he cried.
     'Your duty would be, as I am sure your good sense would suggest, to
     obey any little commands my wife might give, provided always that
     they were such commands as a lady might with propriety obey. You see
     no difficulty, heh?'

     "'I should be happy to make myself useful.'

     "'Quite so. In dress now, for example. We are faddy people, you
     know--faddy but kind-hearted. If you were asked to wear any dress
     which we might give you, you would not object to our little whim.
     Heh?'

     "'No,' said I, considerably astonished at his words.

     "'Or to sit here, or sit there, that would not be offensive to you?'

     "'Oh, no.'

     "'Or to cut your hair quite short before you come to us?'

     "I could hardly believe my ears. As you may observe, Mr. Holmes, my
     hair is somewhat luxuriant, and of a rather peculiar tint of
     chestnut. It has been considered artistic. I could not dream of
     sacrificing it in this offhand fashion.

     "'I am afraid that that is quite impossible,' said I. He had been
     watching me eagerly out of his small eyes, and I could see a shadow
     pass over his face as I spoke.

     "'I am afraid that it is quite essential,' said he. 'It is a little
     fancy of my wife's, and ladies' fancies, you know, madam, ladies'
     fancies must be consulted. And so you won't cut your hair?'

     "'No, sir, I really could not,' I answered firmly.

     "'Ah, very well; then that quite settles the matter. It is a pity,
     because in other respects you would really have done very nicely. In
     that case, Miss Stoper, I had best inspect a few more of your young
     ladies.'

     "The manageress had sat all this while busy with her papers without a
     word to either of us, but she glanced at me now with so much
     annoyance upon her face that I could not help suspecting that she had
     lost a handsome commission through my refusal.

     "'Do you desire your name to be kept upon the books?' she asked.

     "'If you please, Miss Stoper.'

     "'Well, really, it seems rather useless, since you refuse the most
     excellent offers in this fashion,' said she sharply. 'You can hardly
     expect us to exert ourselves to find another such opening for you.
     Good-day to you, Miss Hunter.' She struck a gong upon the table, and
     I was shown out by the page.

     "Well, Mr. Holmes, when I got back to my lodgings and found little
     enough in the cupboard, and two or three bills upon the table. I
     began to ask myself whether I had not done a very foolish thing.
     After all, if these people had strange fads and expected obedience on
     the most extraordinary matters, they were at least ready to pay for
     their eccentricity. Very few governesses in England are getting ?00
     a year. Besides, what use was my hair to me? Many people are improved
     by wearing it short and perhaps I should be among the number. Next
     day I was inclined to think that I had made a mistake, and by the day
     after I was sure of it. I had almost overcome my pride so far as to
     go back to the agency and inquire whether the place was still open
     when I received this letter from the gentleman himself. I have it
     here and I will read it to you:

     "'The Copper Beeches, near Winchester.
     "'Dear Miss Hunter:
     "'Miss Stoper has very kindly given me your address, and I write from
     here to ask you whether you have reconsidered your decision. My wife
     is very anxious that you should come, for she has been much attracted
     by my description of you. We are willing to give ?0 a quarter, or
     ?20 a year, so as to recompense you for any little inconvenience
     which our fads may cause you. They are not very exacting, after all.
     My wife is fond of a particular shade of electric blue and would like
     you to wear such a dress indoors in the morning. You need not,
     however, go to the expense of purchasing one, as we have one
     belonging to my dear daughter Alice (now in Philadelphia), which
     would, I should think, fit you very well. Then, as to sitting here or
     there, or amusing yourself in any manner indicated, that need cause
     you no inconvenience. As regards your hair, it is no doubt a pity,
     especially as I could not help remarking its beauty during our short
     interview, but I am afraid that I must remain firm upon this point,
     and I only hope that the increased salary may recompense you for the
     loss. Your duties, as far as the child is concerned, are very light.
     Now do try to come, and I shall meet you with the dog-cart at
     Winchester. Let me know your train.
     "'Yours faithfully,
     "'Jephro Rucastle.'

     "That is the letter which I have just received, Mr. Holmes, and my
     mind is made up that I will accept it. I thought, however, that
     before taking the final step I should like to submit the whole matter
     to your consideration."

     "Well, Miss Hunter, if your mind is made up, that settles the
     question," said Holmes, smiling.

     "But you would not advise me to refuse?"

     "I confess that it is not the situation which I should like to see a
     sister of mine apply for."

     "What is the meaning of it all, Mr. Holmes?"

     "Ah, I have no data. I cannot tell. Perhaps you have yourself formed
     some opinion?"

     "Well, there seems to me to be only one possible solution. Mr.
     Rucastle seemed to be a very kind, good-natured man. Is it not
     possible that his wife is a lunatic, that he desires to keep the
     matter quiet for fear she should be taken to an asylum, and that he
     humours her fancies in every way in order to prevent an outbreak?"

     "That is a possible solution--in fact, as matters stand, it is the
     most probable one. But in any case it does not seem to be a nice
     household for a young lady."

     "But the money, Mr. Holmes, the money!"

     "Well, yes, of course the pay is good--too good. That is what makes
     me uneasy. Why should they give you ?20 a year, when they could have
     their pick for ?0? There must be some strong reason behind."

     "I thought that if I told you the circumstances you would understand
     afterwards if I wanted your help. I should feel so much stronger if I
     felt that you were at the back of me."

     "Oh, you may carry that feeling away with you. I assure you that your
     little problem promises to be the most interesting which has come my
     way for some months. There is something distinctly novel about some
     of the features. If you should find yourself in doubt or in danger--"

     "Danger! What danger do you foresee?"

     Holmes shook his head gravely. "It would cease to be a danger if we
     could define it," said he. "But at any time, day or night, a telegram
     would bring me down to your help."

     "That is enough." She rose briskly from her chair with the anxiety
     all swept from her face. "I shall go down to Hampshire quite easy in
     my mind now. I shall write to Mr. Rucastle at once, sacrifice my poor
     hair to-night, and start for Winchester to-morrow." With a few
     grateful words to Holmes she bade us both good-night and bustled off
     upon her way.

     "At least," said I as we heard her quick, firm steps descending the
     stairs, "she seems to be a young lady who is very well able to take
     care of herself."

     "And she would need to be," said Holmes gravely. "I am much mistaken
     if we do not hear from her before many days are past."

     It was not very long before my friend's prediction was fulfilled. A
     fortnight went by, during which I frequently found my thoughts
     turning in her direction and wondering what strange side-alley of
     human experience this lonely woman had strayed into. The unusual
     salary, the curious conditions, the light duties, all pointed to
     something abnormal, though whether a fad or a plot, or whether the
     man were a philanthropist or a villain, it was quite beyond my powers
     to determine. As to Holmes, I observed that he sat frequently for
     half an hour on end, with knitted brows and an abstracted air, but he
     swept the matter away with a wave of his hand when I mentioned it.
     "Data! data! data!" he cried impatiently. "I can't make bricks
     without clay." And yet he would always wind up by muttering that no
     sister of his should ever have accepted such a situation.

     The telegram which we eventually received came late one night just as
     I was thinking of turning in and Holmes was settling down to one of
     those all-night chemical researches which he frequently indulged in,
     when I would leave him stooping over a retort and a test-tube at
     night and find him in the same position when I came down to breakfast
     in the morning. He opened the yellow envelope, and then, glancing at
     the message, threw it across to me.

     "Just look up the trains in Bradshaw," said he, and turned back to
     his chemical studies.

     The summons was a brief and urgent one.

     Please be at the Black Swan Hotel at Winchester at midday to-morrow
     [it said]. Do come! I am at my wit's end.
     Hunter.

     "Will you come with me?" asked Holmes, glancing up.

     "I should wish to."

     "Just look it up, then."

     "There is a train at half-past nine," said I, glancing over my
     Bradshaw. "It is due at Winchester at 11.30."

     "That will do very nicely. Then perhaps I had better postpone my
     analysis of the acetones, as we may need to be at our best in the
     morning."

     By eleven o'clock the next day we were well upon our way to the old
     English capital. Holmes had been buried in the morning papers all the
     way down, but after we had passed the Hampshire border he threw them
     down and began to admire the scenery. It was an ideal spring day, a
     light blue sky, flecked with little fleecy white clouds drifting
     across from west to east. The sun was shining very brightly, and yet
     there was an exhilarating nip in the air, which set an edge to a
     man's energy. All over the countryside, away to the rolling hills
     around Aldershot, the little red and grey roofs of the farm-steadings
     peeped out from amid the light green of the new foliage.

     "Are they not fresh and beautiful?" I cried with all the enthusiasm
     of a man fresh from the fogs of Baker Street.

     But Holmes shook his head gravely.

     "Do you know, Watson," said he, "that it is one of the curses of a
     mind with a turn like mine that I must look at everything with
     reference to my own special subject. You look at these scattered
     houses, and you are impressed by their beauty. I look at them, and
     the only thought which comes to me is a feeling of their isolation
     and of the impunity with which crime may be committed there."

     "Good heavens!" I cried. "Who would associate crime with these dear
     old homesteads?"

     "They always fill me with a certain horror. It is my belief, Watson,
     founded upon my experience, that the lowest and vilest alleys in
     London do not present a more dreadful record of sin than does the
     smiling and beautiful countryside."

     "You horrify me!"

     "But the reason is very obvious. The pressure of public opinion can
     do in the town what the law cannot accomplish. There is no lane so
     vile that the scream of a tortured child, or the thud of a drunkard's
     blow, does not beget sympathy and indignation among the neighbours,
     and then the whole machinery of justice is ever so close that a word
     of complaint can set it going, and there is but a step between the
     crime and the dock. But look at these lonely houses, each in its own
     fields, filled for the most part with poor ignorant folk who know
     little of the law. Think of the deeds of hellish cruelty, the hidden
     wickedness which may go on, year in, year out, in such places, and
     none the wiser. Had this lady who appeals to us for help gone to live
     in Winchester, I should never have had a fear for her. It is the five
     miles of country which makes the danger. Still, it is clear that she
     is not personally threatened."

     "No. If she can come to Winchester to meet us she can get away."

     "Quite so. She has her freedom."

     "What can be the matter, then? Can you suggest no explanation?"

     "I have devised seven separate explanations, each of which would
     cover the facts as far as we know them. But which of these is correct
     can only be determined by the fresh information which we shall no
     doubt find waiting for us. Well, there is the tower of the cathedral,
     and we shall soon learn all that Miss Hunter has to tell."

     The Black Swan is an inn of repute in the High Street, at no distance
     from the station, and there we found the young lady waiting for us.
     She had engaged a sitting-room, and our lunch awaited us upon the
     table.

     "I am so delighted that you have come," she said earnestly. "It is so
     very kind of you both; but indeed I do not know what I should do.
     Your advice will be altogether invaluable to me."

     "Pray tell us what has happened to you."

     "I will do so, and I must be quick, for I have promised Mr. Rucastle
     to be back before three. I got his leave to come into town this
     morning, though he little knew for what purpose."

     "Let us have everything in its due order." Holmes thrust his long
     thin legs out towards the fire and composed himself to listen.

     "In the first place, I may say that I have met, on the whole, with no
     actual ill-treatment from Mr. and Mrs. Rucastle. It is only fair to
     them to say that. But I cannot understand them, and I am not easy in
     my mind about them."

     "What can you not understand?"

     "Their reasons for their conduct. But you shall have it all just as
     it occurred. When I came down, Mr. Rucastle met me here and drove me
     in his dog-cart to the Copper Beeches. It is, as he said, beautifully
     situated, but it is not beautiful in itself, for it is a large square
     block of a house, whitewashed, but all stained and streaked with damp
     and bad weather. There are grounds round it, woods on three sides,
     and on the fourth a field which slopes down to the Southampton
     highroad, which curves past about a hundred yards from the front
     door. This ground in front belongs to the house, but the woods all
     round are part of Lord Southerton's preserves. A clump of copper
     beeches immediately in front of the hall door has given its name to
     the place.

     "I was driven over by my employer, who was as amiable as ever, and
     was introduced by him that evening to his wife and the child. There
     was no truth, Mr. Holmes, in the conjecture which seemed to us to be
     probable in your rooms at Baker Street. Mrs. Rucastle is not mad. I
     found her to be a silent, pale-faced woman, much younger than her
     husband, not more than thirty, I should think, while he can hardly be
     less than forty-five. From their conversation I have gathered that
     they have been married about seven years, that he was a widower, and
     that his only child by the first wife was the daughter who has gone
     to Philadelphia. Mr. Rucastle told me in private that the reason why
     she had left them was that she had an unreasoning aversion to her
     stepmother. As the daughter could not have been less than twenty, I
     can quite imagine that her position must have been uncomfortable with
     her father's young wife.

     "Mrs. Rucastle seemed to me to be colourless in mind as well as in
     feature. She impressed me neither favourably nor the reverse. She was
     a nonentity. It was easy to see that she was passionately devoted
     both to her husband and to her little son. Her light grey eyes
     wandered continually from one to the other, noting every little want
     and forestalling it if possible. He was kind to her also in his
     bluff, boisterous fashion, and on the whole they seemed to be a happy
     couple. And yet she had some secret sorrow, this woman. She would
     often be lost in deep thought, with the saddest look upon her face.
     More than once I have surprised her in tears. I have thought
     sometimes that it was the disposition of her child which weighed upon
     her mind, for I have never met so utterly spoiled and so ill-natured
     a little creature. He is small for his age, with a head which is
     quite disproportionately large. His whole life appears to be spent in
     an alternation between savage fits of passion and gloomy intervals of
     sulking. Giving pain to any creature weaker than himself seems to be
     his one idea of amusement, and he shows quite remarkable talent in
     planning the capture of mice, little birds, and insects. But I would
     rather not talk about the creature, Mr. Holmes, and, indeed, he has
     little to do with my story."

     "I am glad of all details," remarked my friend, "whether they seem to
     you to be relevant or not."

     "I shall try not to miss anything of importance. The one unpleasant
     thing about the house, which struck me at once, was the appearance
     and conduct of the servants. There are only two, a man and his wife.
     Toller, for that is his name, is a rough, uncouth man, with grizzled
     hair and whiskers, and a perpetual smell of drink. Twice since I have
     been with them he has been quite drunk, and yet Mr. Rucastle seemed
     to take no notice of it. His wife is a very tall and strong woman
     with a sour face, as silent as Mrs. Rucastle and much less amiable.
     They are a most unpleasant couple, but fortunately I spend most of my
     time in the nursery and my own room, which are next to each other in
     one corner of the building.

     "For two days after my arrival at the Copper Beeches my life was very
     quiet; on the third, Mrs. Rucastle came down just after breakfast and
     whispered something to her husband.

     "'Oh, yes,' said he, turning to me, 'we are very much obliged to you,
     Miss Hunter, for falling in with our whims so far as to cut your
     hair. I assure you that it has not detracted in the tiniest iota from
     your appearance. We shall now see how the electric-blue dress will
     become you. You will find it laid out upon the bed in your room, and
     if you would be so good as to put it on we should both be extremely
     obliged.'

     "The dress which I found waiting for me was of a peculiar shade of
     blue. It was of excellent material, a sort of beige, but it bore
     unmistakable signs of having been worn before. It could not have been
     a better fit if I had been measured for it. Both Mr. and Mrs.
     Rucastle expressed a delight at the look of it, which seemed quite
     exaggerated in its vehemence. They were waiting for me in the
     drawing-room, which is a very large room, stretching along the entire
     front of the house, with three long windows reaching down to the
     floor. A chair had been placed close to the central window, with its
     back turned towards it. In this I was asked to sit, and then Mr.
     Rucastle, walking up and down on the other side of the room, began to
     tell me a series of the funniest stories that I have ever listened
     to. You cannot imagine how comical he was, and I laughed until I was
     quite weary. Mrs. Rucastle, however, who has evidently no sense of
     humour, never so much as smiled, but sat with her hands in her lap,
     and a sad, anxious look upon her face. After an hour or so, Mr.
     Rucastle suddenly remarked that it was time to commence the duties of
     the day, and that I might change my dress and go to little Edward in
     the nursery.

     "Two days later this same performance was gone through under exactly
     similar circumstances. Again I changed my dress, again I sat in the
     window, and again I laughed very heartily at the funny stories of
     which my employer had an immense rpertoire, and which he told
     inimitably. Then he handed me a yellow-backed novel, and moving my
     chair a little sideways, that my own shadow might not fall upon the
     page, he begged me to read aloud to him. I read for about ten
     minutes, beginning in the heart of a chapter, and then suddenly, in
     the middle of a sentence, he ordered me to cease and to change my
     dress.

     "You can easily imagine, Mr. Holmes, how curious I became as to what
     the meaning of this extraordinary performance could possibly be. They
     were always very careful, I observed, to turn my face away from the
     window, so that I became consumed with the desire to see what was
     going on behind my back. At first it seemed to be impossible, but I
     soon devised a means. My hand-mirror had been broken, so a happy
     thought seized me, and I concealed a piece of the glass in my
     handkerchief. On the next occasion, in the midst of my laughter, I
     put my handkerchief up to my eyes, and was able with a little
     management to see all that there was behind me. I confess that I was
     disappointed. There was nothing. At least that was my first
     impression. At the second glance, however, I perceived that there was
     a man standing in the Southampton Road, a small bearded man in a grey
     suit, who seemed to be looking in my direction. The road is an
     important highway, and there are usually people there. This man,
     however, was leaning against the railings which bordered our field
     and was looking earnestly up. I lowered my handkerchief and glanced
     at Mrs. Rucastle to find her eyes fixed upon me with a most searching
     gaze. She said nothing, but I am convinced that she had divined that
     I had a mirror in my hand and had seen what was behind me. She rose
     at once.

     "'Jephro,' said she, 'there is an impertinent fellow upon the road
     there who stares up at Miss Hunter.'

     "'No friend of yours, Miss Hunter?' he asked.

     "'No, I know no one in these parts.'

     "'Dear me! How very impertinent! Kindly turn round and motion to him
     to go away.'

     "'Surely it would be better to take no notice.'

     "'No, no, we should have him loitering here always. Kindly turn round
     and wave him away like that.'

     "I did as I was told, and at the same instant Mrs. Rucastle drew down
     the blind. That was a week ago, and from that time I have not sat
     again in the window, nor have I worn the blue dress, nor seen the man
     in the road."

     "Pray continue," said Holmes. "Your narrative promises to be a most
     interesting one."

     "You will find it rather disconnected, I fear, and there may prove to
     be little relation between the different incidents of which I speak.
     On the very first day that I was at the Copper Beeches, Mr. Rucastle
     took me to a small outhouse which stands near the kitchen door. As we
     approached it I heard the sharp rattling of a chain, and the sound as
     of a large animal moving about.

     "'Look in here!' said Mr. Rucastle, showing me a slit between two
     planks. 'Is he not a beauty?'

     "I looked through and was conscious of two glowing eyes, and of a
     vague figure huddled up in the darkness.

     "'Don't be frightened,' said my employer, laughing at the start which
     I had given. 'It's only Carlo, my mastiff. I call him mine, but
     really old Toller, my groom, is the only man who can do anything with
     him. We feed him once a day, and not too much then, so that he is
     always as keen as mustard. Toller lets him loose every night, and God
     help the trespasser whom he lays his fangs upon. For goodness' sake
     don't you ever on any pretext set your foot over the threshold at
     night, for it's as much as your life is worth.'

     "The warning was no idle one, for two nights later I happened to look
     out of my bedroom window about two o'clock in the morning. It was a
     beautiful moonlight night, and the lawn in front of the house was
     silvered over and almost as bright as day. I was standing, rapt in
     the peaceful beauty of the scene, when I was aware that something was
     moving under the shadow of the copper beeches. As it emerged into the
     moonshine I saw what it was. It was a giant dog, as large as a calf,
     tawny tinted, with hanging jowl, black muzzle, and huge projecting
     bones. It walked slowly across the lawn and vanished into the shadow
     upon the other side. That dreadful sentinel sent a chill to my heart
     which I do not think that any burglar could have done.

     "And now I have a very strange experience to tell you. I had, as you
     know, cut off my hair in London, and I had placed it in a great coil
     at the bottom of my trunk. One evening, after the child was in bed, I
     began to amuse myself by examining the furniture of my room and by
     rearranging my own little things. There was an old chest of drawers
     in the room, the two upper ones empty and open, the lower one locked.
     I had filled the first two with my linen, and as I had still much to
     pack away I was naturally annoyed at not having the use of the third
     drawer. It struck me that it might have been fastened by a mere
     oversight, so I took out my bunch of keys and tried to open it. The
     very first key fitted to perfection, and I drew the drawer open.
     There was only one thing in it, but I am sure that you would never
     guess what it was. It was my coil of hair.

     "I took it up and examined it. It was of the same peculiar tint, and
     the same thickness. But then the impossibility of the thing obtruded
     itself upon me. How could my hair have been locked in the drawer?
     With trembling hands I undid my trunk, turned out the contents, and
     drew from the bottom my own hair. I laid the two tresses together,
     and I assure you that they were identical. Was it not extraordinary?
     Puzzle as I would, I could make nothing at all of what it meant. I
     returned the strange hair to the drawer, and I said nothing of the
     matter to the Rucastles as I felt that I had put myself in the wrong
     by opening a drawer which they had locked.

     "I am naturally observant, as you may have remarked, Mr. Holmes, and
     I soon had a pretty good plan of the whole house in my head. There
     was one wing, however, which appeared not to be inhabited at all. A
     door which faced that which led into the quarters of the Tollers
     opened into this suite, but it was invariably locked. One day,
     however, as I ascended the stair, I met Mr. Rucastle coming out
     through this door, his keys in his hand, and a look on his face which
     made him a very different person to the round, jovial man to whom I
     was accustomed. His cheeks were red, his brow was all crinkled with
     anger, and the veins stood out at his temples with passion. He locked
     the door and hurried past me without a word or a look.

     "This aroused my curiosity, so when I went out for a walk in the
     grounds with my charge, I strolled round to the side from which I
     could see the windows of this part of the house. There were four of
     them in a row, three of which were simply dirty, while the fourth was
     shuttered up. They were evidently all deserted. As I strolled up and
     down, glancing at them occasionally, Mr. Rucastle came out to me,
     looking as merry and jovial as ever.

     "'Ah!' said he, 'you must not think me rude if I passed you without a
     word, my dear young lady. I was preoccupied with business matters.'

     "I assured him that I was not offended. 'By the way,' said I, 'you
     seem to have quite a suite of spare rooms up there, and one of them
     has the shutters up.'

     "He looked surprised and, as it seemed to me, a little startled at my
     remark.

     "'Photography is one of my hobbies,' said he. 'I have made my dark
     room up there. But, dear me! what an observant young lady we have
     come upon. Who would have believed it? Who would have ever believed
     it?' He spoke in a jesting tone, but there was no jest in his eyes as
     he looked at me. I read suspicion there and annoyance, but no jest.

     "Well, Mr. Holmes, from the moment that I understood that there was
     something about that suite of rooms which I was not to know, I was
     all on fire to go over them. It was not mere curiosity, though I have
     my share of that. It was more a feeling of duty--a feeling that some
     good might come from my penetrating to this place. They talk of
     woman's instinct; perhaps it was woman's instinct which gave me that
     feeling. At any rate, it was there, and I was keenly on the lookout
     for any chance to pass the forbidden door.

     "It was only yesterday that the chance came. I may tell you that,
     besides Mr. Rucastle, both Toller and his wife find something to do
     in these deserted rooms, and I once saw him carrying a large black
     linen bag with him through the door. Recently he has been drinking
     hard, and yesterday evening he was very drunk; and when I came
     upstairs there was the key in the door. I have no doubt at all that
     he had left it there. Mr. and Mrs. Rucastle were both downstairs, and
     the child was with them, so that I had an admirable opportunity. I
     turned the key gently in the lock, opened the door, and slipped
     through.

     "There was a little passage in front of me, unpapered and uncarpeted,
     which turned at a right angle at the farther end. Round this corner
     were three doors in a line, the first and third of which were open.
     They each led into an empty room, dusty and cheerless, with two
     windows in the one and one in the other, so thick with dirt that the
     evening light glimmered dimly through them. The centre door was
     closed, and across the outside of it had been fastened one of the
     broad bars of an iron bed, padlocked at one end to a ring in the
     wall, and fastened at the other with stout cord. The door itself was
     locked as well, and the key was not there. This barricaded door
     corresponded clearly with the shuttered window outside, and yet I
     could see by the glimmer from beneath it that the room was not in
     darkness. Evidently there was a skylight which let in light from
     above. As I stood in the passage gazing at the sinister door and
     wondering what secret it might veil, I suddenly heard the sound of
     steps within the room and saw a shadow pass backward and forward
     against the little slit of dim light which shone out from under the
     door. A mad, unreasoning terror rose up in me at the sight, Mr.
     Holmes. My overstrung nerves failed me suddenly, and I turned and
     ran--ran as though some dreadful hand were behind me clutching at the
     skirt of my dress. I rushed down the passage, through the door, and
     straight into the arms of Mr. Rucastle, who was waiting outside.

     "'So,' said he, smiling, 'it was you, then. I thought that it must be
     when I saw the door open.'

     "'Oh, I am so frightened!' I panted.

     "'My dear young lady! my dear young lady!'--you cannot think how
     caressing and soothing his manner was--'and what has frightened you,
     my dear young lady?'

     "But his voice was just a little too coaxing. He overdid it. I was
     keenly on my guard against him.

     "'I was foolish enough to go into the empty wing,' I answered. 'But
     it is so lonely and eerie in this dim light that I was frightened and
     ran out again. Oh, it is so dreadfully still in there!'

     "'Only that?' said he, looking at me keenly.

     "'Why, what did you think?' I asked.

     "'Why do you think that I lock this door?'

     "'I am sure that I do not know.'

     "'It is to keep people out who have no business there. Do you see?'
     He was still smiling in the most amiable manner.

     "'I am sure if I had known--'

     "'Well, then, you know now. And if you ever put your foot over that
     threshold again'--here in an instant the smile hardened into a grin
     of rage, and he glared down at me with the face of a demon--'I'll
     throw you to the mastiff.'

     "I was so terrified that I do not know what I did. I suppose that I
     must have rushed past him into my room. I remember nothing until I
     found myself lying on my bed trembling all over. Then I thought of
     you, Mr. Holmes. I could not live there longer without some advice. I
     was frightened of the house, of the man, of the woman, of the
     servants, even of the child. They were all horrible to me. If I could
     only bring you down all would be well. Of course I might have fled
     from the house, but my curiosity was almost as strong as my fears. My
     mind was soon made up. I would send you a wire. I put on my hat and
     cloak, went down to the office, which is about half a mile from the
     house, and then returned, feeling very much easier. A horrible doubt
     came into my mind as I approached the door lest the dog might be
     loose, but I remembered that Toller had drunk himself into a state of
     insensibility that evening, and I knew that he was the only one in
     the household who had any influence with the savage creature, or who
     would venture to set him free. I slipped in in safety and lay awake
     half the night in my joy at the thought of seeing you. I had no
     difficulty in getting leave to come into Winchester this morning, but
     I must be back before three o'clock, for Mr and Mrs. Rucastle are
     going on a visit, and will be away all the evening, so that I must
     look after the child. Now I have told you all my adventures, Mr.
     Holmes, and I should be very glad if you could tell me what it all
     means, and, above all, what I should do."

     Holmes and I had listened spellbound to this extraordinary story. My
     friend rose now and paced up and down the room, his hands in his
     pockets, and an expression of the most profound gravity upon his
     face.

     "Is Toller still drunk?" he asked.

     "Yes. I heard his wife tell Mrs. Rucastle that she could do nothing
     with him."

     "That is well. And the Rucastles go out to-night?"

     "Yes."

     "Is there a cellar with a good strong lock?"

     "Yes, the wine-cellar."

     "You seem to me to have acted all through this matter like a very
     brave and sensible girl, Miss Hunter. Do you think that you could
     perform one more feat? I should not ask it of you if I did not think
     you a quite exceptional woman."

     "I will try. What is it?"

     "We shall be at the Copper Beeches by seven o'clock, my friend and I.
     The Rucastles will be gone by that time, and Toller will, we hope, be
     incapable. There only remains Mrs. Toller, who might give the alarm.
     If you could send her into the cellar on some errand, and then turn
     the key upon her, you would facilitate matters immensely."

     "I will do it."

     "Excellent! We shall then look thoroughly into the affair. Of course
     there is only one feasible explanation. You have been brought there
     to personate someone, and the real person is imprisoned in this
     chamber. That is obvious. As to who this prisoner is, I have no doubt
     that it is the daughter, Miss Alice Rucastle, if I remember right,
     who was said to have gone to America. You were chosen, doubtless, as
     resembling her in height, figure, and the colour of your hair. Hers
     had been cut off, very possibly in some illness through which she has
     passed, and so, of course, yours had to be sacrificed also. By a
     curious chance you came upon her tresses. The man in the road was
     undoubtedly some friend of hers--possibly her fianc?-and no doubt,
     as you wore the girl's dress and were so like her, he was convinced
     from your laughter, whenever he saw you, and afterwards from your
     gesture, that Miss Rucastle was perfectly happy, and that she no
     longer desired his attentions. The dog is let loose at night to
     prevent him from endeavouring to communicate with her. So much is
     fairly clear. The most serious point in the case is the disposition
     of the child."

     "What on earth has that to do with it?" I ejaculated.

     "My dear Watson, you as a medical man are continually gaining light
     as to the tendencies of a child by the study of the parents. Don't
     you see that the converse is equally valid. I have frequently gained
     my first real insight into the character of parents by studying their
     children. This child's disposition is abnormally cruel, merely for
     cruelty's sake, and whether he derives this from his smiling father,
     as I should suspect, or from his mother, it bodes evil for the poor
     girl who is in their power."

     "I am sure that you are right, Mr. Holmes," cried our client. "A
     thousand things come back to me which make me certain that you have
     hit it. Oh, let us lose not an instant in bringing help to this poor
     creature."

     "We must be circumspect, for we are dealing with a very cunning man.
     We can do nothing until seven o'clock. At that hour we shall be with
     you, and it will not be long before we solve the mystery."

     We were as good as our word, for it was just seven when we reached
     the Copper Beeches, having put up our trap at a wayside public-house.
     The group of trees, with their dark leaves shining like burnished
     metal in the light of the setting sun, were sufficient to mark the
     house even had Miss Hunter not been standing smiling on the
     door-step.

     "Have you managed it?" asked Holmes.

     A loud thudding noise came from somewhere downstairs. "That is Mrs.
     Toller in the cellar," said she. "Her husband lies snoring on the
     kitchen rug. Here are his keys, which are the duplicates of Mr.
     Rucastle's."

     "You have done well indeed!" cried Holmes with enthusiasm. "Now lead
     the way, and we shall soon see the end of this black business."

     We passed up the stair, unlocked the door, followed on down a
     passage, and found ourselves in front of the barricade which Miss
     Hunter had described. Holmes cut the cord and removed the transverse
     bar. Then he tried the various keys in the lock, but without success.
     No sound came from within, and at the silence Holmes' face clouded
     over.

     "I trust that we are not too late," said he. "I think, Miss Hunter,
     that we had better go in without you. Now, Watson, put your shoulder
     to it, and we shall see whether we cannot make our way in."

     It was an old rickety door and gave at once before our united
     strength. Together we rushed into the room. It was empty. There was
     no furniture save a little pallet bed, a small table, and a basketful
     of linen. The skylight above was open, and the prisoner gone.

     "There has been some villainy here," said Holmes; "this beauty has
     guessed Miss Hunter's intentions and has carried his victim off."

     "But how?"

     "Through the skylight. We shall soon see how he managed it." He swung
     himself up onto the roof. "Ah, yes," he cried, "here's the end of a
     long light ladder against the eaves. That is how he did it."

     "But it is impossible," said Miss Hunter; "the ladder was not there
     when the Rucastles went away."

     "He has come back and done it. I tell you that he is a clever and
     dangerous man. I should not be very much surprised if this were he
     whose step I hear now upon the stair. I think, Watson, that it would
     be as well for you to have your pistol ready."

     The words were hardly out of his mouth before a man appeared at the
     door of the room, a very fat and burly man, with a heavy stick in his
     hand. Miss Hunter screamed and shrunk against the wall at the sight
     of him, but Sherlock Holmes sprang forward and confronted him.

     "You villain!" said he, "where's your daughter?"

     The fat man cast his eyes round, and then up at the open skylight.

     "It is for me to ask you that," he shrieked, "you thieves! Spies and
     thieves! I have caught you, have I? You are in my power. I'll serve
     you!" He turned and clattered down the stairs as hard as he could go.

     "He's gone for the dog!" cried Miss Hunter.

     "I have my revolver," said I.

     "Better close the front door," cried Holmes, and we all rushed down
     the stairs together. We had hardly reached the hall when we heard the
     baying of a hound, and then a scream of agony, with a horrible
     worrying sound which it was dreadful to listen to. An elderly man
     with a red face and shaking limbs came staggering out at a side door.

     "My God!" he cried. "Someone has loosed the dog. It's not been fed
     for two days. Quick, quick, or it'll be too late!"

     Holmes and I rushed out and round the angle of the house, with Toller
     hurrying behind us. There was the huge famished brute, its black
     muzzle buried in Rucastle's throat, while he writhed and screamed
     upon the ground. Running up, I blew its brains out, and it fell over
     with its keen white teeth still meeting in the great creases of his
     neck. With much labour we separated them and carried him, living but
     horribly mangled, into the house. We laid him upon the drawing-room
     sofa, and having dispatched the sobered Toller to bear the news to
     his wife, I did what I could to relieve his pain. We were all
     assembled round him when the door opened, and a tall, gaunt woman
     entered the room.

     "Mrs. Toller!" cried Miss Hunter.

     "Yes, miss. Mr. Rucastle let me out when he came back before he went
     up to you. Ah, miss, it is a pity you didn't let me know what you
     were planning, for I would have told you that your pains were
     wasted."

     "Ha!" said Holmes, looking keenly at her. "It is clear that Mrs.
     Toller knows more about this matter than anyone else."

     "Yes, sir, I do, and I am ready enough to tell what I know."

     "Then, pray, sit down, and let us hear it for there are several
     points on which I must confess that I am still in the dark."

     "I will soon make it clear to you," said she; "and I'd have done so
     before now if I could ha' got out from the cellar. If there's
     police-court business over this, you'll remember that I was the one
     that stood your friend, and that I was Miss Alice's friend too.

     "She was never happy at home, Miss Alice wasn't, from the time that
     her father married again. She was slighted like and had no say in
     anything, but it never really became bad for her until after she met
     Mr. Fowler at a friend's house. As well as I could learn, Miss Alice
     had rights of her own by will, but she was so quiet and patient, she
     was, that she never said a word about them but just left everything
     in Mr. Rucastle's hands. He knew he was safe with her; but when there
     was a chance of a husband coming forward, who would ask for all that
     the law would give him, then her father thought it time to put a stop
     on it. He wanted her to sign a paper, so that whether she married or
     not, he could use her money. When she wouldn't do it, he kept on
     worrying her until she got brain-fever, and for six weeks was at
     death's door. Then she got better at last, all worn to a shadow, and
     with her beautiful hair cut off; but that didn't make no change in
     her young man, and he stuck to her as true as man could be."

     "Ah," said Holmes, "I think that what you have been good enough to
     tell us makes the matter fairly clear, and that I can deduce all that
     remains. Mr. Rucastle then, I presume, took to this system of
     imprisonment?"

     "Yes, sir."

     "And brought Miss Hunter down from London in order to get rid of the
     disagreeable persistence of Mr. Fowler."

     "That was it, sir."

     "But Mr. Fowler being a persevering man, as a good seaman should be,
     blockaded the house, and having met you succeeded by certain
     arguments, metallic or otherwise, in convincing you that your
     interests were the same as his."

     "Mr. Fowler was a very kind-spoken, free-handed gentleman," said Mrs.
     Toller serenely.

     "And in this way he managed that your good man should have no want of
     drink, and that a ladder should be ready at the moment when your
     master had gone out."

     "You have it, sir, just as it happened."

     "I am sure we owe you an apology, Mrs. Toller," said Holmes, "for you
     have certainly cleared up everything which puzzled us. And here comes
     the country surgeon and Mrs. Rucastle, so I think, Watson, that we
     had best escort Miss Hunter back to Winchester, as it seems to me
     that our locus standi now is rather a questionable one."

     And thus was solved the mystery of the sinister house with the copper
     beeches in front of the door. Mr. Rucastle survived, but was always a
     broken man, kept alive solely through the care of his devoted wife.
     They still live with their old servants, who probably know so much of
     Rucastle's past life that he finds it difficult to part from them.
     Mr. Fowler and Miss Rucastle were married, by special license, in
     Southampton the day after their flight, and he is now the holder of a
     government appointment in the island of Mauritius. As to Miss Violet
     Hunter, my friend Holmes, rather to my disappointment, manifested no
     further interest in her when once she had ceased to be the centre of
     one of his problems, and she is now the head of a private school at
     Walsall, where I believe that she has met with considerable success.






                         THE MEMOIRS OF SHERLOCK HOLMES





                                  SILVER BLAZE

     "I am afraid, Watson, that I shall have to go," said Holmes, as we
     sat down together to our breakfast one morning.

     "Go! Where to?"

     "To Dartmoor; to King's Pyland."

     I was not surprised. Indeed, my only wonder was that he had not
     already been mixed upon this extraordinary case, which was the one
     topic of conversation through the length and breadth of England. For
     a whole day my companion had rambled about the room with his chin
     upon his chest and his brows knitted, charging and recharging his
     pipe with the strongest black tobacco, and absolutely deaf to any of
     my questions or remarks. Fresh editions of every paper had been sent
     up by our news agent, only to be glanced over and tossed down into a
     corner. Yet, silent as he was, I knew perfectly well what it was over
     which he was brooding.  There was but one problem before the public
     which could challenge his powers of analysis, and that was the
     singular disappearance of the favorite for the Wessex Cup, and the
     tragic murder of its trainer. When, therefore, he suddenly announced
     his intention of setting out for the scene of the drama it was only
     what I had both expected and hoped for.

     "I should be most happy to go down with you if I should not be in the
     way," said I.

     "My dear Watson, you would confer a great favor upon me by coming.
     And I think that your time will not be misspent, for there are points
     about the case which promise to make it an absolutely unique one. We
     have, I think, just time to catch our train at Paddington, and I will
     go further into the matter upon our journey. You would oblige me by
     bringing with you your very excellent field-glass."

     And so it happened that an hour or so later I found myself in the
     corner of a first-class carriage flying along en route for Exeter,
     while Sherlock Holmes, with his sharp, eager face framed in his
     ear-flapped travelling-cap, dipped rapidly into the bundle of fresh
     papers which he had procured at Paddington. We had left Reading far
     behind us before he thrust the last one of them under the seat, and
     offered me his cigar-case.

     "We are going well," said he, looking out the window and glancing at
     his watch. "Our rate at present is fifty-three and a half miles an
     hour."

     "I have not observed the quarter-mile posts," said I.

     "Nor have I. But the telegraph posts upon this line are sixty yards
     apart, and the calculation is a simple one. I presume that you have
     looked into this matter of the murder of John Straker and the
     disappearance of Silver Blaze?"

     "I have seen what the Telegraph and the Chronicle have to say."

     "It is one of those cases where the art of the reasoner should be
     used rather for the sifting of details than for the acquiring of
     fresh evidence. The tragedy has been so uncommon, so complete and of
     such personal importance to so many people, that we are suffering
     from a plethora of surmise, conjecture, and hypothesis. The
     difficulty is to detach the framework of fact--of absolute undeniable
     fact--from the embellishments of theorists and reporters. Then,
     having established ourselves upon this sound basis, it is our duty to
     see what inferences may be drawn and what are the special points upon
     which the whole mystery turns. On Tuesday evening I received
     telegrams from both Colonel Ross, the owner of the horse, and from
     Inspector Gregory, who is looking after the case, inviting my
     cooperation.

     "Tuesday evening!" I exclaimed. "And this is Thursday morning. Why
     didn't you go down yesterday?"

     "Because I made a blunder, my dear Watson--which is, I am afraid, a
     more common occurrence than any one would think who only knew me
     through your memoirs. The fact is that I could not believe it
     possible that the most remarkable horse in England could long remain
     concealed, especially in so sparsely inhabited a place as the north
     of Dartmoor. From hour to hour yesterday I expected to hear that he
     had been found, and that his abductor was the murderer of John
     Straker. When, however, another morning had come, and I found that
     beyond the arrest of young Fitzroy Simpson nothing had been done, I
     felt that it was time for me to take action. Yet in some ways I feel
     that yesterday has not been wasted."

     "You have formed a theory, then?"

     "At least I have got a grip of the essential facts of the case. I
     shall enumerate them to you, for nothing clears up a case so much as
     stating it to another person, and I can hardly expect your
     co-operation if I do not show you the position from which we start."

     I lay back against the cushions, puffing at my cigar, while Holmes,
     leaning forward, with his long, thin forefinger checking off the
     points upon the palm of his left hand, gave me a sketch of the events
     which had led to our journey.

     "Silver Blaze," said he, "is from the Somomy stock, and holds as
     brilliant a record as his famous ancestor. He is now in his fifth
     year, and has brought in turn each of the prizes of the turf to
     Colonel Ross, his fortunate owner. Up to the time of the catastrophe
     he was the first favorite for the Wessex Cup, the betting being three
     to one on him. He has always, however, been a prime favorite with the
     racing public, and has never yet disappointed them, so that even at
     those odds enormous sums of money have been laid upon him. It is
     obvious, therefore, that there were many people who had the strongest
     interest in preventing Silver Blaze from being there at the fall of
     the flag next Tuesday.

     "The fact was, of course, appreciated at King's Pyland, where the
     Colonel's training-stable is situated. Every precaution was taken to
     guard the favorite. The trainer, John Straker, is a retired jockey
     who rode in Colonel Ross's colors before he became too heavy for the
     weighing-chair. He has served the Colonel for five years as jockey
     and for seven as trainer, and has always shown himself to be a
     zealous and honest servant. Under him were three lads; for the
     establishment was a small one, containing only four horses in all.
     One of these lads sat up each night in the stable, while the others
     slept in the loft. All three bore excellent characters. John Straker,
     who is a married man, lived in a small villa about two hundred yards
     from the stables. He has no children, keeps one maid-servant, and is
     comfortably off. The country round is very lonely, but about half a
     mile to the north there is a small cluster of villas which have been
     built by a Tavistock contractor for the use of invalids and others
     who may wish to enjoy the pure Dartmoor air. Tavistock itself lies
     two miles to the west, while across the moor, also about two miles
     distant, is the larger training establishment of Mapleton, which
     belongs to Lord Backwater, and is managed by Silas Brown. In every
     other direction the moor is a complete wilderness, inhabited only by
     a few roaming gypsies. Such was the general situation last Monday
     night when the catastrophe occurred.

     "On that evening the horses had been exercised and watered as usual,
     and the stables were locked up at nine o'clock. Two of the lads
     walked up to the trainer's house, where they had supper in the
     kitchen, while the third, Ned Hunter, remained on guard. At a few
     minutes after nine the maid, Edith Baxter, carried down to the
     stables his supper, which consisted of a dish of curried mutton. She
     took no liquid, as there was a water-tap in the stables, and it was
     the rule that the lad on duty should drink nothing else. The maid
     carried a lantern with her, as it was very dark and the path ran
     across the open moor.

     "Edith Baxter was within thirty yards of the stables, when a man
     appeared out of the darkness and called to her to stop. As he stepped
     into the circle of yellow light thrown by the lantern she saw that he
     was a person of gentlemanly bearing, dressed in a gray suit of
     tweeds, with a cloth cap. He wore gaiters, and carried a heavy stick
     with a knob to it. She was most impressed, however, by the extreme
     pallor of his face and by the nervousness of his manner. His age, she
     thought, would be rather over thirty than under it.

     "'Can you tell me where I am?' he asked. 'I had almost made up my
     mind to sleep on the moor, when I saw the light of your lantern.'

     "'You are close to the King's Pyland training-stables,' said she.

     "'Oh, indeed! What a stroke of luck!' he cried. 'I understand that a
     stable-boy sleeps there alone every night. Perhaps that is his supper
     which you are carrying to him. Now I am sure that you would not be
     too proud to earn the price of a new dress, would you?' He took a
     piece of white paper folded up out of his waistcoat pocket. 'See that
     the boy has this to-night, and you shall have the prettiest frock
     that money can buy.'

     "She was frightened by the earnestness of his manner, and ran past
     him to the window through which she was accustomed to hand the meals.
     It was already opened, and Hunter was seated at the small table
     inside. She had begun to tell him of what had happened, when the
     stranger came up again.

     "'Good-evening,' said he, looking through the window. 'I wanted to
     have a word with you.' The girl has sworn that as he spoke she
     noticed the corner of the little paper packet protruding from his
     closed hand.

     "'What business have you here?' asked the lad.

     "'It's business that may put something into your pocket,' said the
     other. 'You've two horses in for the Wessex Cup--Silver Blaze and
     Bayard. Let me have the straight tip and you won't be a loser. Is it
     a fact that at the weights Bayard could give the other a hundred
     yards in five furlongs, and that the stable have put their money on
     him?'

     "'So, you're one of those damned touts!' cried the lad. 'I'll show
     you how we serve them in King's Pyland.' He sprang up and rushed
     across the stable to unloose the dog. The girl fled away to the
     house, but as she ran she looked back and saw that the stranger was
     leaning through the window. A minute later, however, when Hunter
     rushed out with the hound he was gone, and though he ran all round
     the buildings he failed to find any trace of him."

     "One moment," I asked. "Did the stable-boy, when he ran out with the
     dog, leave the door unlocked behind him?"

     "Excellent, Watson, excellent!" murmured my companion. "The
     importance of the point struck me so forcibly that I sent a special
     wire to Dartmoor yesterday to clear the matter up. The boy locked the
     door before he left it. The window, I may add, was not large enough
     for a man to get through.

     "Hunter waited until his fellow-grooms had returned, when he sent a
     message to the trainer and told him what had occurred. Straker was
     excited at hearing the account, although he does not seem to have
     quite realized its true significance. It left him, however, vaguely
     uneasy, and Mrs. Straker, waking at one in the morning, found that he
     was dressing. In reply to her inquiries, he said that he could not
     sleep on account of his anxiety about the horses, and that he
     intended to walk down to the stables to see that all was well. She
     begged him to remain at home, as she could hear the rain pattering
     against the window, but in spite of her entreaties he pulled on his
     large mackintosh and left the house.

     "Mrs. Straker awoke at seven in the morning, to find that her husband
     had not yet returned. She dressed herself hastily, called the maid,
     and set off for the stables. The door was open; inside, huddled
     together upon a chair, Hunter was sunk in a state of absolute stupor,
     the favorite's stall was empty, and there were no signs of his
     trainer.

     "The two lads who slept in the chaff-cutting loft above the
     harness-room were quickly aroused. They had heard nothing during the
     night, for they are both sound sleepers. Hunter was obviously under
     the influence of some powerful drug, and as no sense could be got out
     of him, he was left to sleep it off while the two lads and the two
     women ran out in search of the absentees. They still had hopes that
     the trainer had for some reason taken out the horse for early
     exercise, but on ascending the knoll near the house, from which all
     the neighboring moors were visible, they not only could see no signs
     of the missing favorite, but they perceived something which warned
     them that they were in the presence of a tragedy.

     "About a quarter of a mile from the stables John Straker's overcoat
     was flapping from a furze-bush. Immediately beyond there was a
     bowl-shaped depression in the moor, and at the bottom of this was
     found the dead body of the unfortunate trainer. His head had been
     shattered by a savage blow from some heavy weapon, and he was wounded
     on the thigh, where there was a long, clean cut, inflicted evidently
     by some very sharp instrument. It was clear, however, that Straker
     had defended himself vigorously against his assailants, for in his
     right hand he held a small knife, which was clotted with blood up to
     the handle, while in his left he clasped a red and black silk cravat,
     which was recognized by the maid as having been worn on the preceding
     evening by the stranger who had visited the stables. Hunter, on
     recovering from his stupor, was also quite positive as to the
     ownership of the cravat. He was equally certain that the same
     stranger had, while standing at the window, drugged his curried
     mutton, and so deprived the stables of their watchman. As to the
     missing horse, there were abundant proofs in the mud which lay at the
     bottom of the fatal hollow that he had been there at the time of the
     struggle. But from that morning he has disappeared, and although a
     large reward has been offered, and all the gypsies of Dartmoor are on
     the alert, no news has come of him. Finally, an analysis has shown
     that the remains of his supper left by the stable-lad contain an
     appreciable quantity of powdered opium, while the people at the house
     partook of the same dish on the same night without any ill effect.

     "Those are the main facts of the case, stripped of all surmise, and
     stated as baldly as possible. I shall now recapitulate what the
     police have done in the matter.

     "Inspector Gregory, to whom the case has been committed, is an
     extremely competent officer. Were he but gifted with imagination he
     might rise to great heights in his profession. On his arrival he
     promptly found and arrested the man upon whom suspicion naturally
     rested. There was little difficulty in finding him, for he inhabited
     one of those villas which I have mentioned. His name, it appears, was
     Fitzroy Simpson. He was a man of excellent birth and education, who
     had squandered a fortune upon the turf, and who lived now by doing a
     little quiet and genteel book-making in the sporting clubs of London.
     An examination of his betting-book shows that bets to the amount of
     five thousand pounds had been registered by him against the favorite.
     On being arrested he volunteered that statement that he had come down
     to Dartmoor in the hope of getting some information about the King's
     Pyland horses, and also about Desborough, the second favorite, which
     was in charge of Silas Brown at the Mapleton stables. He did not
     attempt to deny that he had acted as described upon the evening
     before, but declared that he had no sinister designs, and had simply
     wished to obtain first-hand information. When confronted with his
     cravat, he turned very pale, and was utterly unable to account for
     its presence in the hand of the murdered man. His wet clothing showed
     that he had been out in the storm of the night before, and his stick,
     which was a Penang-lawyer weighted with lead, was just such a weapon
     as might, by repeated blows, have inflicted the terrible injuries to
     which the trainer had succumbed. On the other hand, there was no
     wound upon his person, while the state of Straker's knife would show
     that one at least of his assailants must bear his mark upon him.
     There you have it all in a nutshell, Watson, and if you can give me
     any light I shall be infinitely obliged to you."

     I had listened with the greatest interest to the statement which
     Holmes, with characteristic clearness, had laid before me. Though
     most of the facts were familiar to me, I had not sufficiently
     appreciated their relative importance, nor their connection to each
     other.

     "Is in not possible," I suggested, "that the incised wound upon
     Straker may have been caused by his own knife in the convulsive
     struggles which follow any brain injury?"

     "It is more than possible; it is probable," said Holmes. "In that
     case one of the main points in favor of the accused disappears."

     "And yet," said I, "even now I fail to understand what the theory of
     the police can be."

     "I am afraid that whatever theory we state has very grave objections
     to it," returned my companion. "The police imagine, I take it, that
     this Fitzroy Simpson, having drugged the lad, and having in some way
     obtained a duplicate key, opened the stable door and took out the
     horse, with the intention, apparently, of kidnapping him altogether.
     His bridle is missing, so that Simpson must have put this on. Then,
     having left the door open behind him, he was leading the horse away
     over the moor, when he was either met or overtaken by the trainer. A
     row naturally ensued. Simpson beat out the trainer's brains with his
     heavy stick without receiving any injury from the small knife which
     Straker used in self-defence, and then the thief either led the horse
     on to some secret hiding-place, or else it may have bolted during the
     struggle, and be now wandering out on the moors. That is the case as
     it appears to the police, and improbable as it is, all other
     explanations are more improbable still. However, I shall very quickly
     test the matter when I am once upon the spot, and until then I cannot
     really see how we can get much further than our present position."

     It was evening before we reached the little town of Tavistock, which
     lies, like the boss of a shield, in the middle of the huge circle of
     Dartmoor. Two gentlemen were awaiting us in the station--the one a
     tall, fair man with lion-like hair and beard and curiously
     penetrating light blue eyes; the other a small, alert person, very
     neat and dapper, in a frock-coat and gaiters, with trim little
     side-whiskers and an eye-glass. The latter was Colonel Ross, the
     well-known sportsman; the other, Inspector Gregory, a man who was
     rapidly making his name in the English detective service.

     "I am delighted that you have come down, Mr. Holmes," said the
     Colonel. "The Inspector here has done all that could possibly be
     suggested, but I wish to leave no stone unturned in trying to avenge
     poor Straker and in recovering my horse."

     "Have there been any fresh developments?" asked Holmes.

     "I am sorry to say that we have made very little progress," said the
     Inspector. "We have an open carriage outside, and as you would no
     doubt like to see the place before the light fails, we might talk it
     over as we drive."

     A minute later we were all seated in a comfortable landau, and were
     rattling through the quaint old Devonshire city. Inspector Gregory
     was full of his case, and poured out a stream of remarks, while
     Holmes threw in an occasional question or interjection. Colonel Ross
     leaned back with his arms folded and his hat tilted over his eyes,
     while I listened with interest to the dialogue of the two detectives.
     Gregory was formulating his theory, which was almost exactly what
     Holmes had foretold in the train.

     "The net is drawn pretty close round Fitzroy Simpson," he remarked,
     "and I believe myself that he is our man. At the same time I
     recognize that the evidence is purely circumstantial, and that some
     new development may upset it."

     "How about Straker's knife?"

     "We have quite come to the conclusion that he wounded himself in his
     fall."

     "My friend Dr. Watson made that suggestion to me as we came down. If
     so, it would tell against this man Simpson."

     "Undoubtedly. He has neither a knife nor any sign of a wound. The
     evidence against him is certainly very strong. He had a great
     interest in the disappearance of the favorite. He lies under
     suspicion of having poisoned the stable-boy, he was undoubtedly out
     in the storm, he was armed with a heavy stick, and his cravat was
     found in the dead man's hand. I really think we have enough to go
     before a jury."

     Holmes shook his head. "A clever counsel would tear it all to rags,"
     said he. "Why should he take the horse out of the stable? If he
     wished to injure it why could he not do it there? Has a duplicate key
     been found in his possession? What chemist sold him the powdered
     opium? Above all, where could he, a stranger to the district, hide a
     horse, and such a horse as this? What is his own explanation as to
     the paper which he wished the maid to give to the stable-boy?"

     "He says that it was a ten-pound note. One was found in his purse.
     But your other difficulties are not so formidable as they seem. He is
     not a stranger to the district. He has twice lodged at Tavistock in
     the summer. The opium was probably brought from London. The key,
     having served its purpose, would be hurled away. The horse may be at
     the bottom of one of the pits or old mines upon the moor."

     "What does he say about the cravat?"

     "He acknowledges that it is his, and declares that he had lost it.
     But a new element has been introduced into the case which may account
     for his leading the horse from the stable."

     Holmes pricked up his ears.

     "We have found traces which show that a party of gypsies encamped on
     Monday night within a mile of the spot where the murder took place.
     On Tuesday they were gone. Now, presuming that there was some
     understanding between Simpson and these gypsies, might he not have
     been leading the horse to them when he was overtaken, and may they
     not have him now?"

     "It is certainly possible."

     "The moor is being scoured for these gypsies. I have also examined
     every stable and out-house in Tavistock, and for a radius of ten
     miles."

     "There is another training-stable quite close, I understand?"

     "Yes, and that is a factor which we must certainly not neglect. As
     Desborough, their horse, was second in the betting, they had an
     interest in the disappearance of the favorite. Silas Brown, the
     trainer, is known to have had large bets upon the event, and he was
     no friend to poor Straker. We have, however, examined the stables,
     and there is nothing to connect him with the affair."

     "And nothing to connect this man Simpson with the interests of the
     Mapleton stables?"

     "Nothing at all."

     Holmes leaned back in the carriage, and the conversation ceased. A
     few minutes later our driver pulled up at a neat little red-brick
     villa with overhanging eaves which stood by the road. Some distance
     off, across a paddock, lay a long gray-tiled out-building. In every
     other direction the low curves of the moor, bronze-colored from the
     fading ferns, stretched away to the sky-line, broken only by the
     steeples of Tavistock, and by a cluster of houses away to the
     westward which marked the Mapleton stables. We all sprang out with
     the exception of Holmes, who continued to lean back with his eyes
     fixed upon the sky in front of him, entirely absorbed in his own
     thoughts. It was only when I touched his arm that he roused himself
     with a violent start and stepped out of the carriage.

     "Excuse me," said he, turning to Colonel Ross, who had looked at him
     in some surprise. "I was day-dreaming." There was a gleam in his eyes
     and a suppressed excitement in his manner which convinced me, used as
     I was to his ways, that his hand was upon a clue, though I could not
     imagine where he had found it.

     "Perhaps you would prefer at once to go on to the scene of the crime,
     Mr. Holmes?" said Gregory.

     "I think that I should prefer to stay here a little and go into one
     or two questions of detail. Straker was brought back here, I
     presume?"

     "Yes; he lies upstairs. The inquest is to-morrow."

     "He has been in your service some years, Colonel Ross?"

     "I have always found him an excellent servant."

     "I presume that you made an inventory of what he had in this pockets
     at the time of his death, Inspector?"

     "I have the things themselves in the sitting-room, if you would care
     to see them."

     "I should be very glad." We all filed into the front room and sat
     round the central table while the Inspector unlocked a square tin box
     and laid a small heap of things before us. There was a box of vestas,
     two inches of tallow candle, an A D P brier-root pipe, a pouch of
     seal-skin with half an ounce of long-cut Cavendish, a silver watch
     with a gold chain, five sovereigns in gold, an aluminum pencil-case,
     a few papers, and an ivory-handled knife with a very delicate,
     inflexible blade marked Weiss & Co., London.

     "This is a very singular knife," said Holmes, lifting it up and
     examining it minutely. "I presume, as I see blood-stains upon it,
     that it is the one which was found in the dead man's grasp. Watson,
     this knife is surely in your line?"

     "It is what we call a cataract knife," said I.

     "I thought so. A very delicate blade devised for very delicate work.
     A strange thing for a man to carry with him upon a rough expedition,
     especially as it would not shut in his pocket."

     "The tip was guarded by a disk of cork which we found beside his
     body," said the Inspector. "His wife tells us that the knife had lain
     upon the dressing-table, and that he had picked it up as he left the
     room. It was a poor weapon, but perhaps the best that he could lay
     his hands on at the moment."

     "Very possible. How about these papers?"

     "Three of them are receipted hay-dealers' accounts. One of them is a
     letter of instructions from Colonel Ross. This other is a milliner's
     account for thirty-seven pounds fifteen made out by Madame Lesurier,
     of Bond Street, to William Derbyshire. Mrs. Straker tells us that
     Derbyshire was a friend of her husband's and that occasionally his
     letters were addressed here."

     "Madam Derbyshire had somewhat expensive tastes," remarked Holmes,
     glancing down the account. "Twenty-two guineas is rather heavy for a
     single costume. However there appears to be nothing more to learn,
     and we may now go down to the scene of the crime."

     As we emerged from the sitting-room a woman, who had been waiting in
     the passage, took a step forward and laid her hand upon the
     Inspector's sleeve. Her face was haggard and thin and eager, stamped
     with the print of a recent horror.

     "Have you got them? Have you found them?" she panted.

     "No, Mrs. Straker. But Mr. Holmes here has come from London to help
     us, and we shall do all that is possible."

     "Surely I met you in Plymouth at a garden-party some little time ago,
     Mrs. Straker?" said Holmes.

     "No, sir; you are mistaken."

     "Dear me! Why, I could have sworn to it. You wore a costume of
     dove-colored silk with ostrich-feather trimming."

     "I never had such a dress, sir," answered the lady.

     "Ah, that quite settles it," said Holmes. And with an apology he
     followed the Inspector outside. A short walk across the moor took us
     to the hollow in which the body had been found. At the brink of it
     was the furze-bush upon which the coat had been hung.

     "There was no wind that night, I understand," said Holmes.

     "None; but very heavy rain."

     "In that case the overcoat was not blown against the furze-bush, but
     placed there."

     "Yes, it was laid across the bush."

     "You fill me with interest, I perceive that the ground has been
     trampled up a good deal. No doubt many feet have been here since
     Monday night."

     "A piece of matting has been laid here at the side, and we have all
     stood upon that."

     "Excellent."

     "In this bag I have one of the boots which Straker wore, one of
     Fitzroy Simpson's shoes, and a cast horseshoe of Silver Blaze."

     "My dear Inspector, you surpass yourself!" Holmes took the bag, and,
     descending into the hollow, he pushed the matting into a more central
     position. Then stretching himself upon his face and leaning his chin
     upon his hands, he made a careful study of the trampled mud in front
     of him. "Hullo!" said he, suddenly. "What's this?" It was a wax vesta
     half burned, which was so coated with mud that it looked at first
     like a little chip of wood.

     "I cannot think how I came to overlook it," said the Inspector, with
     an expression of annoyance.

     "It was invisible, buried in the mud. I only saw it because I was
     looking for it."

     "What! You expected to find it?"

     "I thought it not unlikely."

     He took the boots from the bag, and compared the impressions of each
     of them with marks upon the ground. Then he clambered up to the rim
     of the hollow, and crawled about among the ferns and bushes.

     "I am afraid that there are no more tracks," said the Inspector. "I
     have examined the ground very carefully for a hundred yards in each
     direction."

     "Indeed!" said Holmes, rising. "I should not have the impertinence to
     do it again after what you say. But I should like to take a little
     walk over the moor before it grows dark, that I may know my ground
     to-morrow, and I think that I shall put this horseshoe into my pocket
     for luck."

     Colonel Ross, who had shown some signs of impatience at my
     companion's quiet and systematic method of work, glanced at his
     watch. "I wish you would come back with me, Inspector," said he.
     "There are several points on which I should like your advice, and
     especially as to whether we do not owe it to the public to remove our
     horse's name from the entries for the Cup."

     "Certainly not," cried Holmes, with decision. "I should let the name
     stand."

     The Colonel bowed. "I am very glad to have had your opinion, sir,"
     said he. "You will find us at poor Straker's house when you have
     finished your walk, and we can drive together into Tavistock."

     He turned back with the Inspector, while Holmes and I walked slowly
     across the moor. The sun was beginning to sink behind the stables of
     Mapleton, and the long, sloping plain in front of us was tinged with
     gold, deepening into rich, ruddy browns where the faded ferns and
     brambles caught the evening light. But the glories of the landscape
     were all wasted upon my companion, who was sunk in the deepest
     thought.

     "It's this way, Watson," said he at last. "We may leave the question
     of who killed John Straker for the instant, and confine ourselves to
     finding out what has become of the horse. Now, supposing that he
     broke away during or after the tragedy, where could he have gone to?
     The horse is a very gregarious creature. If left to himself his
     instincts would have been either to return to King's Pyland or go
     over to Mapleton. Why should he run wild upon the moor? He would
     surely have been seen by now. And why should gypsies kidnap him?
     These people always clear out when they hear of trouble, for they do
     not wish to be pestered by the police. They could not hope to sell
     such a horse. They would run a great risk and gain nothing by taking
     him. Surely that is clear."

     "Where is he, then?"

     "I have already said that he must have gone to King's Pyland or to
     Mapleton. He is not at King's Pyland. Therefore he is at Mapleton.
     Let us take that as a working hypothesis and see what it leads us to.
     This part of the moor, as the Inspector remarked, is very hard and
     dry. But it falls away towards Mapleton, and you can see from here
     that there is a long hollow over yonder, which must have been very
     wet on Monday night. If our supposition is correct, then the horse
     must have crossed that, and there is the point where we should look
     for his tracks."

     We had been walking briskly during this conversation, and a few more
     minutes brought us to the hollow in question. At Holmes' request I
     walked down the bank to the right, and he to the left, but I had not
     taken fifty paces before I heard him give a shout, and saw him waving
     his hand to me. The track of a horse was plainly outlined in the soft
     earth in front of him, and the shoe which he took from his pocket
     exactly fitted the impression.

     "See the value of imagination," said Holmes. "It is the one quality
     which Gregory lacks. We imagined what might have happened, acted upon
     the supposition, and find ourselves justified. Let us proceed."

     We crossed the marshy bottom and passed over a quarter of a mile of
     dry, hard turf. Again the ground sloped, and again we came on the
     tracks. Then we lost them for half a mile, but only to pick them up
     once more quite close to Mapleton. It was Holmes who saw them first,
     and he stood pointing with a look of triumph upon his face. A man's
     track was visible beside the horse's.

     "The horse was alone before," I cried.

     "Quite so. It was alone before. Hullo, what is this?"

     The double track turned sharp off and took the direction of King's
     Pyland. Holmes whistled, and we both followed along after it. His
     eyes were on the trail, but I happened to look a little to one side,
     and saw to my surprise the same tracks coming back again in the
     opposite direction.

     "One for you, Watson," said Holmes, when I pointed it out. "You have
     saved us a long walk, which would have brought us back on our own
     traces. Let us follow the return track."

     We had not to go far. It ended at the paving of asphalt which led up
     to the gates of the Mapleton stables. As we approached, a groom ran
     out from them.

     "We don't want any loiterers about here," said he.

     "I only wished to ask a question," said Holmes, with his finger and
     thumb in his waistcoat pocket. "Should I be too early to see your
     master, Mr. Silas Brown, if I were to call at five o'clock to-morrow
     morning?"

     "Bless you, sir, if any one is about he will be, for he is always the
     first stirring. But here he is, sir, to answer your questions for
     himself. No, sir, no; it is as much as my place is worth to let him
     see me touch your money. Afterwards, if you like."

     As Sherlock Holmes replaced the half-crown which he had drawn from
     his pocket, a fierce-looking elderly man strode out from the gate
     with a hunting-crop swinging in his hand.

     "What's this, Dawson!" he cried. "No gossiping! Go about your
     business! And you, what the devil do you want here?"

     "Ten minutes' talk with you, my good sir," said Holmes in the
     sweetest of voices.

     "I've no time to talk to every gadabout. We want no stranger here. Be
     off, or you may find a dog at your heels."

     Holmes leaned forward and whispered something in the trainer's ear.
     He started violently and flushed to the temples.

     "It's a lie!" he shouted, "an infernal lie!"

     "Very good. Shall we argue about it here in public or talk it over in
     your parlor?"

     "Oh, come in if you wish to."

     Holmes smiled. "I shall not keep you more than a few minutes,
     Watson," said he. "Now, Mr. Brown, I am quite at your disposal."

     It was twenty minutes, and the reds had all faded into grays before
     Holmes and the trainer reappeared. Never have I seen such a change as
     had been brought about in Silas Brown in that short time. His face
     was ashy pale, beads of perspiration shone upon his brow, and his
     hands shook until the hunting-crop wagged like a branch in the wind.
     His bullying, overbearing manner was all gone too, and he cringed
     along at my companion's side like a dog with its master.

     "Your instructions will be done. It shall all be done," said he.

     "There must be no mistake," said Holmes, looking round at him. The
     other winced as he read the menace in his eyes.

     "Oh no, there shall be no mistake. It shall be there. Should I change
     it first or not?"

     Holmes thought a little and then burst out laughing. "No, don't,"
     said he; "I shall write to you about it. No tricks, now, or--"

     "Oh, you can trust me, you can trust me!"

     "Yes, I think I can. Well, you shall hear from me to-morrow." He
     turned upon his heel, disregarding the trembling hand which the other
     held out to him, and we set off for King's Pyland.

     "A more perfect compound of the bully, coward, and sneak than Master
     Silas Brown I have seldom met with," remarked Holmes as we trudged
     along together.

     "He has the horse, then?"

     "He tried to bluster out of it, but I described to him so exactly
     what his actions had been upon that morning that he is convinced that
     I was watching him. Of course you observed the peculiarly square toes
     in the impressions, and that his own boots exactly corresponded to
     them. Again, of course no subordinate would have dared to do such a
     thing. I described to him how, when according to his custom he was
     the first down, he perceived a strange horse wandering over the moor.
     How he went out to it, and his astonishment at recognizing, from the
     white forehead which has given the favorite its name, that chance had
     put in his power the only horse which could beat the one upon which
     he had put his money. Then I described how his first impulse had been
     to lead him back to King's Pyland, and how the devil had shown him
     how he could hide the horse until the race was over, and how he had
     led it back and concealed it at Mapleton. When I told him every
     detail he gave it up and thought only of saving his own skin."

     "But his stables had been searched?"

     "Oh, and old horse-fakir like him has many a dodge."

     "But are you not afraid to leave the horse in his power now, since he
     has every interest in injuring it?"

     "My dear fellow, he will guard it as the apple of his eye. He knows
     that his only hope of mercy is to produce it safe."

     "Colonel Ross did not impress me as a man who would be likely to show
     much mercy in any case."

     "The matter does not rest with Colonel Ross. I follow my own methods,
     and tell as much or as little as I choose. That is the advantage of
     being unofficial. I don't know whether you observed it, Watson, but
     the Colonel's manner has been just a trifle cavalier to me. I am
     inclined now to have a little amusement at his expense. Say nothing
     to him about the horse."

     "Certainly not without your permission."

     "And of course this is all quite a minor point compared to the
     question of who killed John Straker."

     "And you will devote yourself to that?"

     "On the contrary, we both go back to London by the night train."

     I was thunderstruck by my friend's words. We had only been a few
     hours in Devonshire, and that he should give up an investigation
     which he had begun so brilliantly was quite incomprehensible to me.
     Not a word more could I draw from him until we were back at the
     trainer's house. The Colonel and the Inspector were awaiting us in
     the parlor.

     "My friend and I return to town by the night-express," said Holmes.
     "We have had a charming little breath of your beautiful Dartmoor
     air."

     The Inspector opened his eyes, and the Colonel's lip curled in a
     sneer.

     "So you despair of arresting the murderer of poor Straker," said he.

     Holmes shrugged his shoulders. "There are certainly grave
     difficulties in the way," said he. "I have every hope, however, that
     your horse will start upon Tuesday, and I beg that you will have your
     jockey in readiness. Might I ask for a photograph of Mr. John
     Straker?"

     The Inspector took one from an envelope and handed it to him.

     "My dear Gregory, you anticipate all my wants. If I might ask you to
     wait here for an instant, I have a question which I should like to
     put to the maid."

     "I must say that I am rather disappointed in our London consultant,"
     said Colonel Ross, bluntly, as my friend left the room. "I do not see
     that we are any further than when he came."

     "At least you have his assurance that your horse will run," said I.

     "Yes, I have his assurance," said the Colonel, with a shrug of his
     shoulders. "I should prefer to have the horse."

     I was about to make some reply in defence of my friend when he
     entered the room again.

     "Now, gentlemen," said he, "I am quite ready for Tavistock."

     As we stepped into the carriage one of the stable-lads held the door
     open for us. A sudden idea seemed to occur to Holmes, for he leaned
     forward and touched the lad upon the sleeve.

     "You have a few sheep in the paddock," he said. "Who attends to
     them?"

     "I do, sir."

     "Have you noticed anything amiss with them of late?"

     "Well, sir, not of much account; but three of them have gone lame,
     sir."

     I could see that Holmes was extremely pleased, for he chuckled and
     rubbed his hands together.

     "A long shot, Watson; a very long shot," said he, pinching my arm.
     "Gregory, let me recommend to your attention this singular epidemic
     among the sheep. Drive on, coachman!"

     Colonel Ross still wore an expression which showed the poor opinion
     which he had formed of my companion's ability, but I saw by the
     Inspector's face that his attention had been keenly aroused.

     "You consider that to be important?" he asked.

     "Exceedingly so."

     "Is there any point to which you would wish to draw my attention?"

     "To the curious incident of the dog in the night-time."

     "The dog did nothing in the night-time."

     "That was the curious incident," remarked Sherlock Holmes.

     Four days later Holmes and I were again in the train, bound for
     Winchester to see the race for the Wessex Cup. Colonel Ross met us by
     appointment outside the station, and we drove in his drag to the
     course beyond the town. His face was grave, and his manner was cold
     in the extreme.

     "I have seen nothing of my horse," said he.

     "I suppose that you would know him when you saw him?" asked Holmes.

     The Colonel was very angry. "I have been on the turf for twenty
     years, and never was asked such a question as that before," said he.
     "A child would know Silver Blaze, with his white forehead and his
     mottled off-foreleg."

     "How is the betting?"

     "Well, that is the curious part of it. You could have got fifteen to
     one yesterday, but the price has become shorter and shorter, until
     you can hardly get three to one now."

     "Hum!" said Holmes. "Somebody knows something, that is clear."

     As the drag drew up in the enclosure near the grand stand I glanced
     at the card to see the entries.

     Wessex Plate [it ran] 50 sovs. each h ft with 1000 sovs. added, for
     four and five year olds. Second, ?00. Third, ?00. New course (one
     mile and five furlongs).

     1. Mr. Heath Newton's The Negro. Red cap. Cinnamon jacket.
     2. Colonel Wardlaw's Pugilist. Pink cap. Blue and black jacket.
     3. Lord Backwater's Desborough. Yellow cap and sleeves.
     4. Colonel Ross's Silver Blaze. Black cap. Red jacket.
     5. Duke of Balmoral's Iris. Yellow and black stripes.
     6. Lord Singleford's Rasper. Purple cap. Black sleeves.

     "We scratched our other one, and put all hopes on your word," said
     the Colonel. "Why, what is that? Silver Blaze favorite?"

     "Five to four against Silver Blaze!" roared the ring. "Five to four
     against Silver Blaze! Five to fifteen against Desborough! Five to
     four on the field!"

     "There are the numbers up," I cried. "They are all six there."

     "All six there? Then my horse is running," cried the Colonel in great
     agitation. "But I don't see him. My colors have not passed."

     "Only five have passed. This must be he."

     As I spoke a powerful bay horse swept out from the weighting
     enclosure and cantered past us, bearing on its back the well-known
     black and red of the Colonel.

     "That's not my horse," cried the owner. "That beast has not a white
     hair upon its body. What is this that you have done, Mr. Holmes?"

     "Well, well, let us see how he gets on," said my friend,
     imperturbably. For a few minutes he gazed through my field-glass.
     "Capital! An excellent start!" he cried suddenly. "There they are,
     coming round the curve!"

     From our drag we had a superb view as they came up the straight. The
     six horses were so close together that a carpet could have covered
     them, but half way up the yellow of the Mapleton stable showed to the
     front. Before they reached us, however, Desborough's bolt was shot,
     and the Colonel's horse, coming away with a rush, passed the post a
     good six lengths before its rival, the Duke of Balmoral's Iris making
     a bad third.

     "It's my race, anyhow," gasped the Colonel, passing his hand over his
     eyes. "I confess that I can make neither head nor tail of it. Don't
     you think that you have kept up your mystery long enough, Mr.
     Holmes?"

     "Certainly, Colonel, you shall know everything. Let us all go round
     and have a look at the horse together. Here he is," he continued, as
     we made our way into the weighing enclosure, where only owners and
     their friends find admittance. "You have only to wash his face and
     his leg in spirits of wine, and you will find that he is the same old
     Silver Blaze as ever."

     "You take my breath away!"

     "I found him in the hands of a fakir, and took the liberty of running
     him just as he was sent over."

     "My dear sir, you have done wonders. The horse looks very fit and
     well. It never went better in its life. I owe you a thousand
     apologies for having doubted your ability. You have done me a great
     service by recovering my horse. You would do me a greater still if
     you could lay your hands on the murderer of John Straker."

     "I have done so," said Holmes quietly.

     The Colonel and I stared at him in amazement. "You have got him!
     Where is he, then?"

     "He is here."

     "Here! Where?"

     "In my company at the present moment."

     The Colonel flushed angrily. "I quite recognize that I am under
     obligations to you, Mr. Holmes," said he, "but I must regard what you
     have just said as either a very bad joke or an insult."

     Sherlock Holmes laughed. "I assure you that I have not associated you
     with the crime, Colonel," said he. "The real murderer is standing
     immediately behind you." He stepped past and laid his hand upon the
     glossy neck of the thoroughbred.

     "The horse!" cried both the Colonel and myself.

     "Yes, the horse. And it may lessen his guilt if I say that it was
     done in self-defence, and that John Straker was a man who was
     entirely unworthy of your confidence. But there goes the bell, and as
     I stand to win a little on this next race, I shall defer a lengthy
     explanation until a more fitting time."

     We had the corner of a Pullman car to ourselves that evening as we
     whirled back to London, and I fancy that the journey was a short one
     to Colonel Ross as well as to myself, as we listened to our
     companion's narrative of the events which had occurred at the
     Dartmoor training-stables upon the Monday night, and the means by
     which he had unravelled them.

     "I confess," said he, "that any theories which I had formed from the
     newspaper reports were entirely erroneous. And yet there were
     indications there, had they not been overlaid by other details which
     concealed their true import. I went to Devonshire with the conviction
     that Fitzroy Simpson was the true culprit, although, of course, I saw
     that the evidence against him was by no means complete. It was while
     I was in the carriage, just as we reached the trainer's house, that
     the immense significance of the curried mutton occurred to me. You
     may remember that I was distrait, and remained sitting after you had
     all alighted. I was marvelling in my own mind how I could possibly
     have overlooked so obvious a clue."

     "I confess," said the Colonel, "that even now I cannot see how it
     helps us."

     "It was the first link in my chain of reasoning. Powdered opium is by
     no means tasteless. The flavor is not disagreeable, but it is
     perceptible. Were it mixed with any ordinary dish the eater would
     undoubtedly detect it, and would probably eat no more. A curry was
     exactly the medium which would disguise this taste. By no possible
     supposition could this stranger, Fitzroy Simpson, have caused curry
     to be served in the trainer's family that night, and it is surely too
     monstrous a coincidence to suppose that he happened to come along
     with powdered opium upon the very night when a dish happened to be
     served which would disguise the flavor. That is unthinkable.
     Therefore Simpson becomes eliminated from the case, and our attention
     centers upon Straker and his wife, the only two people who could have
     chosen curried mutton for supper that night. The opium was added
     after the dish was set aside for the stable-boy, for the others had
     the same for supper with no ill effects. Which of them, then, had
     access to that dish without the maid seeing them?

     "Before deciding that question I had grasped the significance of the
     silence of the dog, for one true inference invariably suggests
     others. The Simpson incident had shown me that a dog was kept in the
     stables, and yet, though some one had been in and had fetched out a
     horse, he had not barked enough to arouse the two lads in the loft.
     Obviously the midnight visitor was some one whom the dog knew well.

     "I was already convinced, or almost convinced, that John Straker went
     down to the stables in the dead of the night and took out Silver
     Blaze. For what purpose? For a dishonest one, obviously, or why
     should he drug his own stable-boy? And yet I was at a loss to know
     why. There have been cases before now where trainers have made sure
     of great sums of money by laying against their own horses, through
     agents, and then preventing them from winning by fraud. Sometimes it
     is a pulling jockey. Sometimes it is some surer and subtler means.
     What was it here? I hoped that the contents of his pockets might help
     me to form a conclusion.

     "And they did so. You cannot have forgotten the singular knife which
     was found in the dead man's hand, a knife which certainly no sane man
     would choose for a weapon. It was, as Dr. Watson told us, a form of
     knife which is used for the most delicate operations known in
     surgery. And it was to be used for a delicate operation that night.
     You must know, with your wide experience of turf matters, Colonel
     Ross, that it is possible to make a slight nick upon the tendons of a
     horse's ham, and to do it subcutaneously, so as to leave absolutely
     no trace. A horse so treated would develop a slight lameness, which
     would be put down to a strain in exercise or a touch of rheumatism,
     but never to foul play."

     "Villain! Scoundrel!" cried the Colonel.

     "We have here the explanation of why John Straker wished to take the
     horse out on to the moor. So spirited a creature would have certainly
     roused the soundest of sleepers when it felt the prick of the knife.
     It was absolutely necessary to do it in the open air."

     "I have been blind!" cried the Colonel. "Of course that was why he
     needed the candle, and struck the match."

     "Undoubtedly. But in examining his belongings I was fortunate enough
     to discover not only the method of the crime, but even its motives.
     As a man of the world, Colonel, you know that men do not carry other
     people's bills about in their pockets. We have most of us quite
     enough to do to settle our own. I at once concluded that Straker was
     leading a double life, and keeping a second establishment. The nature
     of the bill showed that there was a lady in the case, and one who had
     expensive tastes. Liberal as you are with your servants, one can
     hardly expect that they can buy twenty-guinea walking dresses for
     their ladies. I questioned Mrs. Straker as to the dress without her
     knowing it, and having satisfied myself that it had never reached
     her, I made a note of the milliner's address, and felt that by
     calling there with Straker's photograph I could easily dispose of the
     mythical Derbyshire.

     "From that time on all was plain. Straker had led out the horse to a
     hollow where his light would be invisible. Simpson in his flight had
     dropped his cravat, and Straker had picked it up--with some idea,
     perhaps, that he might use it in securing the horse's leg. Once in
     the hollow, he had got behind the horse and had struck a light; but
     the creature frightened at the sudden glare, and with the strange
     instinct of animals feeling that some mischief was intended, had
     lashed out, and the steel shoe had struck Straker full on the
     forehead. He had already, in spite of the rain, taken off his
     overcoat in order to do his delicate task, and so, as he fell, his
     knife gashed his thigh. Do I make it clear?"

     "Wonderful!" cried the Colonel. "Wonderful! You might have been
     there!"

     "My final shot was, I confess a very long one. It struck me that so
     astute a man as Straker would not undertake this delicate
     tendon-nicking without a little practice. What could he practice on?
     My eyes fell upon the sheep, and I asked a question which, rather to
     my surprise, showed that my surmise was correct.

     "When I returned to London I called upon the milliner, who had
     recognized Straker as an excellent customer of the name of
     Derbyshire, who had a very dashing wife, with a strong partiality for
     expensive dresses. I have no doubt that this woman had plunged him
     over head and ears in debt, and so led him into this miserable plot."

     "You have explained all but one thing," cried the Colonel. "Where was
     the horse?"

     "Ah, it bolted, and was cared for by one of your neighbors. We must
     have an amnesty in that direction, I think. This is Clapham Junction,
     if I am not mistaken, and we shall be in Victoria in less than ten
     minutes. If you care to smoke a cigar in our rooms, Colonel, I shall
     be happy to give you any other details which might interest you."






                                 THE YELLOW FACE

     [In publishing these short sketches based upon the numerous cases in
     which my companion's singular gifts have made us the listeners to,
     and eventually the actors in, some strange drama, it is only natural
     that I should dwell rather upon his successes than upon his failures.
     And this not so much for the sake of his reputations--for, indeed, it
     was when he was at his wits' end that his energy and his versatility
     were most admirable--but because where he failed it happened too
     often that no one else succeeded, and that the tale was left forever
     without a conclusion. Now and again, however, it chanced that even
     when he erred, the truth was still discovered. I have noted of some
     half-dozen cases of the kind the Adventure of the Musgrave Ritual and
     that which I am about to recount are the two which present the
     strongest features of interest.]

     Sherlock Holmes was a man who seldom took exercise for exercise's
     sake. Few men were capable of greater muscular effort, and he was
     undoubtedly one of the finest boxers of his weight that I have ever
     seen; but he looked upon aimless bodily exertion as a waste of
     energy, and he seldom bestirred himself save when there was some
     professional object to be served. Then he was absolutely untiring and
     indefatigable. That he should have kept himself in training under
     such circumstances is remarkable, but his diet was usually of the
     sparest, and his habits were simple to the verge of austerity. Save
     for the occasional use of cocaine, he had no vices, and he only
     turned to the drug as a protest against the monotony of existence
     when cases were scanty and the papers uninteresting.

     One day in early spring he had so far relaxed as to go for a walk
     with me in the Park, where the first faint shoots of green were
     breaking out upon the elms, and the sticky spear-heads of the
     chestnuts were just beginning to burst into their five-fold leaves.
     For two hours we rambled about together, in silence for the most
     part, as befits two men who know each other intimately. It was nearly
     five before we were back in Baker Street once more.

     "Beg pardon, sir," said our page-boy, as he opened the door. "There's
     been a gentleman here asking for you, sir."

     Holmes glanced reproachfully at me. "So much for afternoon walks!"
     said he. "Has this gentleman gone, then?"

     "Yes, sir."

     "Didn't you ask him in?"

     "Yes, sir; he came in."

     "How long did he wait?"

     "Half an hour, sir. He was a very restless gentleman, sir, a-walkin'
     and a-stampin' all the time he was here. I was waitin' outside the
     door, sir, and I could hear him. At last he outs into the passage,
     and he cries, 'Is that man never goin' to come?' Those were his very
     words, sir. 'You'll only need to wait a little longer,' says I. 'Then
     I'll wait in the open air, for I feel half choked,' says he. 'I'll be
     back before long.' And with that he ups and he outs, and all I could
     say wouldn't hold him back."

     "Well, well, you did your best," said Holmes, as we walked into our
     room. "It's very annoying, though, Watson. I was badly in need of a
     case, and this looks, from the man's impatience, as if it were of
     importance. Hullo! That's not your pipe on the table. He must have
     left his behind him. A nice old brier with a good long stem of what
     the tobacconists call amber. I wonder how many real amber mouthpieces
     there are in London? Some people think that a fly in it is a sign.
     Well, he must have been disturbed in his mind to leave a pipe behind
     him which he evidently values highly."

     "How do you know that he values it highly?" I asked.

     "Well, I should put the original cost of the pipe at seven and
     sixpence. Now it has, you see, been twice mended, once in the wooden
     stem and once in the amber. Each of these mends, done, as you
     observe, with silver bands, must have cost more than the pipe did
     originally. The man must value the pipe highly when he prefers to
     patch it up rather than buy a new one with the same money."

     "Anything else?" I asked, for Holmes was turning the pipe about in
     his hand, and staring at it in his peculiar pensive way.

     He held it up and tapped on it with his long, thin fore-finger, as a
     professor might who was lecturing on a bone.

     "Pipes are occasionally of extraordinary interest," said he. "Nothing
     has more individuality, save perhaps watches and bootlaces. The
     indications here, however, are neither very marked nor very
     important. The owner is obviously a muscular man, left-handed, with
     an excellent set of teeth, careless in his habits, and with no need
     to practise economy."

     My friend threw out the information in a very offhand way, but I saw
     that he cocked his eye at me to see if I had followed his reasoning.

     "You think a man must be well-to-do if he smokes a seven-shilling
     pipe," said I.

     "This is Grosvenor mixture at eightpence an ounce," Holmes answered,
     knocking a little out on his palm. "As he might get an excellent
     smoke for half the price, he has no need to practise economy."

     "And the other points?"

     "He has been in the habit of lighting his pipe at lamps and gas-jets.
     You can see that it is quite charred all down one side. Of course a
     match could not have done that. Why should a man hold a match to the
     side of his pipe? But you cannot light it at a lamp without getting
     the bowl charred. And it is all on the right side of the pipe. From
     that I gather that he is a left-handed man. You hold your own pipe to
     the lamp, and see how naturally you, being right-handed, hold the
     left side to the flame. You might do it once the other way, but not
     as a constancy. This has always been held so. Then he has bitten
     through his amber. It takes a muscular, energetic fellow, and one
     with a good set of teeth, to do that. But if I am not mistaken I hear
     him upon the stair, so we shall have something more interesting than
     his pipe to study."

     An instant later our door opened, and a tall young man entered the
     room. He was well but quietly dressed in a dark-gray suit, and
     carried a brown wide-awake in his hand. I should have put him at
     about thirty, though he was really some years older.

     "I beg your pardon," said he, with some embarrassment; "I suppose I
     should have knocked. Yes, of course I should have knocked. The fact
     is that I am a little upset, and you must put it all down to that."
     He passed his hand over his forehead like a man who is half dazed,
     and then fell rather than sat down upon a chair.

     "I can see that you have not slept for a night or two," said Holmes,
     in his easy, genial way. "That tries a man's nerves more than work,
     and more even than pleasure. May I ask how I can help you?"

     "I wanted your advice, sir. I don't know what to do and my whole life
     seems to have gone to pieces."

     "You wish to employ me as a consulting detective?"

     "Not that only. I want your opinion as a judicious man--as a man of
     the world. I want to know what I ought to do next. I hope to God
     you'll be able to tell me."

     He spoke in little, sharp, jerky outbursts, and it seemed to me that
     to speak at all was very painful to him, and that his will all
     through was overriding his inclinations.

     "It's a very delicate thing," said he. "One does not like to speak of
     one's domestic affairs to strangers. It seems dreadful to discuss the
     conduct of one's wife with two men whom I have never seen before.
     It's horrible to have to do it. But I've got to the end of my tether,
     and I must have advice."

     "My dear Mr. Grant Munro--" began Holmes.

     Our visitor sprang from his char. "What!" he cried, "you know my
     mane?"

     "If you wish to preserve your incognito," said Holmes, smiling, "I
     would suggest that you cease to write your name upon the lining of
     your hat, or else that you turn the crown towards the person whom you
     are addressing. I was about to say that my friend and I have listened
     to a good many strange secrets in this room, and that we have had the
     good fortune to bring peace to many troubled souls. I trust that we
     may do as much for you. Might I beg you, as time may prove to be of
     importance, to furnish me with the facts of your case without further
     delay?"

     Our visitor again passed his hand over his forehead, as if he found
     it bitterly hard. From every gesture and expression I could see that
     he was a reserved, self-contained man, with a dash of pride in his
     nature, more likely to hide his wounds than to expose them. Then
     suddenly, with a fierce gesture of his closed hand, like one who
     throws reserve to the winds, he began.

     "The facts are these, Mr. Holmes," said he. "I am a married man, and
     have been so for three years. During that time my wife and I have
     loved each other as fondly and lived as happily as any two that ever
     were joined. We have not had a difference, not one, in thought or
     word or deed. And now, since last Monday, there has suddenly sprung
     up a barrier between us, and I find that there is something in her
     life and in her thought of which I know as little as if she were the
     woman who brushes by me in the street. We are estranged, and I want
     to know why.

     "Now there is one thing that I want to impress upon you before I go
     any further, Mr. Holmes. Effie loves me. Don't let there be any
     mistake about that. She loves me with her whole heart and soul, and
     never more than now. I know it. I feel it. I don't want to argue
     about that. A man can tell easily enough when a woman loves him. But
     there's this secret between us, and we can never be the same until it
     is cleared."

     "Kindly let me have the facts, Mr. Munro," said Holmes, with some
     impatience.

     "I'll tell you what I know about Effie's history. She was a widow
     when I met her first, though quite young--only twenty-five. Her name
     then was Mrs. Hebron. She went out to America when she was young, and
     lived in the town of Atlanta, where she married this Hebron, who was
     a lawyer with a good practice. They had one child, but the yellow
     fever broke out badly in the place, and both husband and child died
     of it. I have seen his death certificate. This sickened her of
     America, and she came back to live with a maiden aunt at Pinner, in
     Middlesex. I may mention that her husband had left her comfortably
     off, and that she had a capital of about four thousand five hundred
     pounds, which had been so well invested by him that it returned an
     average of seven per cent. She had only been six months at Pinner
     when I met her; we fell in love with each other, and we married a few
     weeks afterwards.

     "I am a hop merchant myself, and as I have an income of seven or
     eight hundred, we found ourselves comfortably off, and took a nice
     eighty-pound-a-year villa at Norbury. Our little place was very
     countrified, considering that it is so close to town. We had an inn
     and two houses a little above us, and a single cottage at the other
     side of the field which faces us, and except those there were no
     houses until you got half way to the station. My business took me
     into town at certain seasons, but in summer I had less to do, and
     then in our country home my wife and I were just as happy as could be
     wished. I tell you that there never was a shadow between us until
     this accursed affair began.

     "There's one thing I ought to tell you before I go further. When we
     married, my wife made over all her property to me--rather against my
     will, for I saw how awkward it would be if my business affairs went
     wrong. However, she would have it so, and it was done. Well, about
     six weeks ago she came to me.

     "'Jack,' said she, 'when you took my money you said that if ever I
     wanted any I was to ask you for it.'

     "'Certainly,' said I. 'It's all your own.'

     "'Well,' said she, 'I want a hundred pounds.'

     "I was a bit staggered at this, for I had imagined it was simply a
     new dress or something of the kind that she was after.

     "'What on earth for?' I asked.

     "'Oh,' said she, in her playful way, 'you said that you were only my
     banker, and bankers never ask questions, you know.'

     "'If you really mean it, of course you shall have the money,' said I.

     "'Oh, yes, I really mean it.'

     "'And you won't tell me what you want it for?'

     "'Some day, perhaps, but not just at present, Jack.'

     "So I had to be content with that, thought it was the first time that
     there had ever been any secret between us. I gave her a check, and I
     never thought any more of the matter. It may have nothing to do with
     what came afterwards, but I thought it only right to mention it.

     "Well, I told you just now that there is a cottage not far from our
     house. There is just a field between us, but to reach it you have to
     go along the road and then turn down a lane. Just beyond it is a nice
     little grove of Scotch firs, and I used to be very fond of strolling
     down there, for trees are always a neighborly kind of things. The
     cottage had been standing empty this eight months, and it was a pity,
     for it was a pretty two storied place, with an old-fashioned porch
     and honeysuckle about it. I have stood many a time and thought what a
     neat little homestead it would make.

     "Well, last Monday evening I was taking a stroll down that way, when
     I met an empty van coming up the lane, and saw a pile of carpets and
     things lying about on the grass-plot beside the porch. It was clear
     that the cottage had at last been let. I walked past it, and wondered
     what sort of folk they were who had come to live so near us. And as I
     looked I suddenly became aware that a face was watching me out of one
     of the upper windows.

     "I don't know what there was about that face, Mr. Holmes, but it
     seemed to send a chill right down my back. I was some little way off,
     so that I could not make out the features, but there was something
     unnatural and inhuman about the face. That was the impression that I
     had, and I moved quickly forwards to get a nearer view of the person
     who was watching me. But as I did so the face suddenly disappeared,
     so suddenly that it seemed to have been plucked away into the
     darkness of the room. I stood for five minutes thinking the business
     over, and trying to analyze my impressions. I could not tell if the
     face were that of a man or a woman. It had been too far from me for
     that. But its color was what had impressed me most. It was of a livid
     chalky white, and with something set and rigid about it which was
     shockingly unnatural. So disturbed was I that I determined to see a
     little more of the new inmates of the cottage. I approached and
     knocked at the door, which was instantly opened by a tall, gaunt
     woman with a harsh, forbidding face.

     "'What may you be wantin'?' she asked, in a Northern accent.

     "'I am your neighbor over yonder,' said I, nodding towards my house.
     'I see that you have only just moved in, so I thought that if I could
     be of any help to you in any--'

     "'Ay, we'll just ask ye when we want ye,' said she, and shut the door
     in my face. Annoyed at the churlish rebuff, I turned my back and
     walked home. All evening, though I tried to think of other things, my
     mind would still turn to the apparition at the window and the
     rudeness of the woman. I determined to say nothing about the former
     to my wife, for she is a nervous, highly strung woman, and I had no
     wish that she would share the unpleasant impression which had been
     produced upon myself. I remarked to her, however, before I fell
     asleep, that the cottage was now occupied, to which she returned no
     reply.

     "I am usually an extremely sound sleeper. It has been a standing jest
     in the family that nothing could ever wake me during the night. And
     yet somehow on that particular night, whether it may have been the
     slight excitement produced by my little adventure or not I know not,
     but I slept much more lightly than usual. Half in my dreams I was
     dimly conscious that something was going on in the room, and
     gradually became aware that my wife had dressed herself and was
     slipping on her mantle and her bonnet. My lips were parted to murmur
     out some sleepy words of surprise or remonstrance at this untimely
     preparation, when suddenly my half-opened eyes fell upon her face,
     illuminated by the candle-light, and astonishment held me dumb. She
     wore an expression such as I had never seen before--such as I should
     have thought her incapable of assuming. She was deadly pale and
     breathing fast, glancing furtively towards the bed as she fastened
     her mantle, to see if she had disturbed me. Then, thinking that I was
     still asleep, she slipped noiselessly from the room, and an instant
     later I heard a sharp creaking which could only come from the hinges
     of the front door. I sat up in bed and rapped my knuckles against the
     rail to make certain that I was truly awake. Then I took my watch
     from under the pillow. It was three in the morning. What on this
     earth could my wife be doing out on the country road at three in the
     morning?

     "I had sat for about twenty minutes turning the thing over in my mind
     and trying to find some possible explanation. The more I thought, the
     more extraordinary and inexplicable did it appear. I was still
     puzzling over it when I heard the door gently close again, and her
     footsteps coming up the stairs.

     "'Where in the world have you been, Effie?' I asked as she entered.

     "She gave a violent start and a kind of gasping cry when I spoke, and
     that cry and start troubled me more than all the rest, for there was
     something indescribably guilty about them. My wife had always been a
     woman of a frank, open nature, and it gave me a chill to see her
     slinking into her own room, and crying out and wincing when her own
     husband spoke to her.

     "'You awake, Jack!' she cried, with a nervous laugh. 'Why, I thought
     that nothing could awake you.'

     "'Where have you been?' I asked, more sternly.

     "'I don't wonder that you are surprised,' said she, and I could see
     that her fingers were trembling as she undid the fastenings of her
     mantle. 'Why, I never remember having done such a thing in my life
     before. The fact is that I felt as though I were choking, and had a
     perfect longing for a breath of fresh air. I really think that I
     should have fainted if I had not gone out. I stood at the door for a
     few minutes, and now I am quite myself again.'

     "All the time that she was telling me this story she never once
     looked in my direction, and her voice was quite unlike her usual
     tones. It was evident to me that she was saying what was false. I
     said nothing in reply, but turned my face to the wall, sick at heart,
     with my mind filled with a thousand venomous doubts and suspicions.
     What was it that my wife was concealing from me? Where had she been
     during that strange expedition? I felt that I should have no peace
     until I knew, and yet I shrank from asking her again after once she
     had told me what was false. All the rest of the night I tossed and
     tumbled, framing theory after theory, each more unlikely than the
     last.

     "I should have gone to the City that day, but I was too disturbed in
     my mind to be able to pay attention to business matters. My wife
     seemed to be as upset as myself, and I could see from the little
     questioning glances which she kept shooting at me that she understood
     that I disbelieved her statement, and that she was at her wits' end
     what to do. We hardly exchanged a word during breakfast, and
     immediately afterwards I went out for a walk, that I might think the
     matter out in the fresh morning air.

     "I went as far as the Crystal Palace, spent an hour in the grounds,
     and was back in Norbury by one o'clock. It happened that my way took
     me past the cottage, and I stopped for an instant to look at the
     windows, and to see if I could catch a glimpse of the strange face
     which had looked out at me on the day before. As I stood there,
     imagine my surprise, Mr. Holmes, when the door suddenly opened and my
     wife walked out.

     "I was struck dumb with astonishment at the sight of her; but my
     emotions were nothing to those which showed themselves upon her face
     when our eyes met. She seemed for an instant to wish to shrink back
     inside the house again; and then, seeing how useless all concealment
     must be, she came forward, with a very white face and frightened eyes
     which belied the smile upon her lips.

     "'Ah, Jack,' she said, 'I have just been in to see if I can be of any
     assistance to our new neighbors. Why do you look at me like that,
     Jack? You are not angry with me?'

     "'So,' said I, 'this is where you went during the night.'

     "'What do you mean?' she cried.

     "'You came here. I am sure of it. Who are these people, that you
     should visit them at such an hour?'

     "'I have not been here before.'

     "'How can you tell me what you know is false?' I cried. 'Your very
     voice changes as you speak. When have I ever had a secret from you? I
     shall enter that cottage, and I shall probe the matter to the
     bottom.'

     "'No, no, Jack, for God's sake!' she gasped, in uncontrollable
     emotion. Then, as I approached the door, she seized my sleeve and
     pulled me back with convulsive strength.

     "'I implore you not to do this, Jack,' she cried. 'I swear that I
     will tell you everything some day, but nothing but misery can come of
     it if you enter that cottage.' Then, as I tried to shake her off, she
     clung to me in a frenzy of entreaty.

     "'Trust me, Jack!' she cried. 'Trust me only this once. You will
     never have cause to regret it. You know that I would not have a
     secret from you if it were not for your own sake. Our whole lives are
     at stake in this. If you come home with me, all will be well. If you
     force your way into that cottage, all is over between us.'

     "There was such earnestness, such despair, in her manner that her
     words arrested me, and I stood irresolute before the door.

     "'I will trust you on one condition, and on one condition only,' said
     I at last. 'It is that this mystery comes to an end from now. You are
     at liberty to preserve your secret, but you must promise me that
     there shall be no more nightly visits, no more doings which are kept
     from my knowledge. I am willing to forget those which are passed if
     you will promise that there shall be no more in the future.'

     "'I was sure that you would trust me,' she cried, with a great sigh
     of relief. 'It shall be just as you wish. Come away--oh, come away up
     to the house.'

     "Still pulling at my sleeve, she led me away from the cottage. As we
     went I glanced back, and there was that yellow livid face watching us
     out of the upper window. What link could there be between that
     creature and my wife? Or how could the coarse, rough woman whom I had
     seen the day before be connected with her? It was a strange puzzle,
     and yet I knew that my mind could never know ease again until I had
     solved it.

     "For two days after this I stayed at home, and my wife appeared to
     abide loyally by our engagement, for, as far as I know, she never
     stirred out of the house. On the third day, however, I had ample
     evidence that her solemn promise was not enough to hold her back from
     this secret influence which drew her away from her husband and her
     duty.

     "I had gone into town on that day, but I returned by the 2.40 instead
     of the 3.36, which is my usual train. As I entered the house the maid
     ran into the hall with a startled face.

     "'Where is your mistress?' I asked.

     "'I think that she has gone out for a walk,' she answered.

     "My mind was instantly filled with suspicion. I rushed upstairs to
     make sure that she was not in the house. As I did so I happened to
     glance out of one of the upper windows, and saw the maid with whom I
     had just been speaking running across the field in the direction of
     the cottage. Then of course I saw exactly what it all meant. My wife
     had gone over there, and had asked the servant to call her if I
     should return. Tingling with anger, I rushed down and hurried across,
     determined to end the matter once and forever. I saw my wife and the
     maid hurrying back along the lane, but I did not stop to speak with
     them. In the cottage lay the secret which was casting a shadow over
     my life. I vowed that, come what might, it should be a secret no
     longer. I did not even knock when I reached it, but turned the handle
     and rushed into the passage.

     "It was all still and quiet upon the ground floor. In the kitchen a
     kettle was singing on the fire, and a large black cat lay coiled up
     in the basket; but there was no sign of the woman whom I had seen
     before. I ran into the other room, but it was equally deserted. Then
     I rushed up the stairs, only to find two other rooms empty and
     deserted at the top. There was no one at all in the whole house. The
     furniture and pictures were of the most common and vulgar
     description, save in the one chamber at the window of which I had
     seen the strange face. That was comfortable and elegant, and all my
     suspicions rose into a fierce bitter flame when I saw that on the
     mantelpiece stood a copy of a fell-length photograph of my wife,
     which had been taken at my request only three months ago.

     "I stayed long enough to make certain that the house was absolutely
     empty. Then I left it, feeling a weight at my heart such as I had
     never had before. My wife came out into the hall as I entered my
     house; but I was too hurt and angry to speak with her, and pushing
     past her, I made my way into my study. She followed me, however,
     before I could close the door.

     "'I am sorry that I broke my promise, Jack,' said she; 'but if you
     knew all the circumstances I am sure that you would forgive me.'

     "'Tell me everything, then,' said I.

     "'I cannot, Jack, I cannot,' she cried.

     "'Until you tell me who it is that has been living in that cottage,
     and who it is to whom you have given that photograph, there can never
     be any confidence between us,' said I, and breaking away from her, I
     left the house. That was yesterday, Mr. Holmes, and I have not seen
     her since, nor do I know anything more about this strange business.
     It is the first shadow that has come between us, and it has so shaken
     me that I do not know what I should do for the best. Suddenly this
     morning it occurred to me that you were the man to advise me, so I
     have hurried to you now, and I place myself unreservedly in your
     hands. If there is any point which I have not made clear, pray
     question me about it. But, above all, tell me quickly what I am to
     do, for this misery is more than I can bear."

     Holmes and I had listened with the utmost interest to this
     extraordinary statement, which had been delivered in the jerky,
     broken fashion of a man who is under the influence of extreme
     emotions. My companion sat silent for some time, with his chin upon
     his hand, lost in thought.

     "Tell me," said he at last, "could you swear that this was a man's
     face which you saw at the window?"

     "Each time that I saw it I was some distance away from it, so that it
     is impossible for me to say."

     "You appear, however, to have been disagreeably impressed by it."

     "It seemed to be of an unnatural color, and to have a strange
     rigidity about the features. When I approached, it vanished with a
     jerk."

     "How long is it since your wife asked you for a hundred pounds?"

     "Nearly two months."

     "Have you ever seen a photograph of her first husband?"

     "No; there was a great fire at Atlanta very shortly after his death,
     and all her papers were destroyed."

     "And yet she had a certificate of death. You say that you saw it."

     "Yes; she got a duplicate after the fire."

     "Did you ever meet any one who knew her in America?"

     "No."

     "Did she ever talk of revisiting the place?"

     "No."

     "Or get letters from it?"

     "No."

     "Thank you. I should like to think over the matter a little now. If
     the cottage is now permanently deserted we may have some difficulty.
     If, on the other hand, as I fancy is more likely, the inmates were
     warned of your coming, and left before you entered yesterday, then
     they may be back now, and we should clear it all up easily. Let me
     advise you, then, to return to Norbury, and to examine the windows of
     the cottage again. If you have reason to believe that is inhabited,
     do not force your way in, but send a wire to my friend and me. We
     shall be with you within an hour of receiving it, and we shall then
     very soon get to the bottom of the business."

     "And if it is still empty?"

     "In that case I shall come out to-morrow and talk it over with you.
     Good-bye, and, above all, do not fret until you know that you really
     have a cause for it."

     "I am afraid that this is a bad business, Watson," said my companion,
     as he returned after accompanying Mr. Grant Munro to the door. "What
     do you make of it?"

     "It had an ugly sound," I answered.

     "Yes. There's blackmail in it, or I am much mistaken."

     "And who is the blackmailer?"

     "Well, it must be the creature who lives in the only comfortable room
     in the place, and has her photograph above his fireplace. Upon my
     word, Watson, there is something very attractive about that livid
     face at the window, and I would not have missed the case for worlds."

     "You have a theory?"

     "Yes, a provisional one. But I shall be surprised if it does not turn
     out to be correct. This woman's first husband is in that cottage."

     "Why do you think so?"

     "How else can we explain her frenzied anxiety that her second one
     should not enter it? The facts, as I read them, are something like
     this: This woman was married in America. Her husband developed some
     hateful qualities; or shall we say that he contracted some loathsome
     disease, and became a leper or an imbecile? She flies from him at
     last, returns to England, changes her name, and starts her life, as
     she thinks, afresh. She has been married three years, and believes
     that her position is quite secure, having shown her husband the death
     certificate of some man whose name she has assumed, when suddenly her
     whereabouts is discovered by her first husband; or, we may suppose,
     by some unscrupulous woman who has attached herself to the invalid.
     They write to the wife, and threaten to come and expose her. She asks
     for a hundred pounds, and endeavors to buy them off. They come in
     spite of it, and when the husband mentions casually to the wife that
     there a new-comers in the cottage, she knows in some way that they
     are her pursuers. She waits until her husband is asleep, and then she
     rushes down to endeavor to persuade them to leave her in peace.
     Having no success, she goes again next morning, and her husband meets
     her, as he has told us, as she comes out. She promises him then not
     to go there again, but two days afterwards the hope of getting rid of
     those dreadful neighbors was too strong for her, and she made another
     attempt, taking down with her the photograph which had probably been
     demanded from her. In the midst of this interview the maid rushed in
     to say that the master had come home, on which the wife, knowing that
     he would come straight down to the cottage, hurried the inmates out
     at the back door, into the grove of fir-trees, probably, which was
     mentioned as standing near. In this way he found the place deserted.
     I shall be very much surprised, however, if it still so when he
     reconnoitres it this evening. What do you think of my theory?"

     "It is all surmise."

     "But at least it covers all the facts. When new facts come to our
     knowledge which cannot be covered by it, it will be time enough to
     reconsider it. We can do nothing more until we have a message from
     our friend at Norbury."

     But we had not a very long time to wait for that. It came just as we
     had finished our tea.

     "The cottage is still tenanted," it said. "Have seen the face again
     at the window. Will meet the seven o'clock train, and will take no
     steps until you arrive."

     He was waiting on the platform when we stepped out, and we could see
     in the light of the station lamps that he was very pale, and
     quivering with agitation.

     "They are still there, Mr. Holmes," said he, laying his hand hard
     upon my friend's sleeve. "I saw lights in the cottage as I came down.
     We shall settle it now once and for all."

     "What is your plan, then?" asked Holmes, as he walked down the dark
     tree-lined road.

     "I am going to force my way in and see for myself who is in the
     house. I wish you both to be there as witnesses."

     "You are quite determined to do this, in spite of your wife's warning
     that it is better that you should not solve the mystery?"

     "Yes, I am determined."

     "Well, I think that you are in the right. Any truth is better than
     indefinite doubt. We had better go up at once. Of course, legally, we
     are putting ourselves hopelessly in the wrong; but I think that it is
     worth it."

     It was a very dark night, and a thin rain began to fall as we turned
     from the high road into a narrow lane, deeply rutted, with hedges on
     either side. Mr. Grant Munro pushed impatiently forward, however, and
     we stumbled after him as best we could.

     "There are the lights of my house," he murmured, pointing to a
     glimmer among the trees. "And here is the cottage which I am going to
     enter."

     We turned a corner in the lane as he spoke, and there was the
     building close beside us. A yellow bar falling across the black
     foreground showed that the door was not quite closed, and one window
     in the upper story was brightly illuminated. As we looked, we saw a
     dark blur moving across the blind.

     "There is that creature!" cried Grant Munro. "You can see for
     yourselves that some one is there. Now follow me, and we shall soon
     know all."

     We approached the door; but suddenly a woman appeared out of the
     shadow and stood in the golden track of the lamp-light. I could not
     see her face in the he darkness, but her arms were thrown out in an
     attitude of entreaty.

     "For God's sake, don't Jack!" she cried. "I had a presentiment that
     you would come this evening. Think better of it, dear! Trust me
     again, and you will never have cause to regret it."

     "I have trusted you too long, Effie," he cried, sternly. "Leave go of
     me! I must pass you. My friends and I are going to settle this matter
     once and forever!" He pushed her to one side, and we followed closely
     after him. As he threw the door open an old woman ran out in front of
     him and tried to bar his passage, but he thrust her back, and an
     instant afterwards we were all upon the stairs. Grant Munro rushed
     into the lighted room at the top, and we entered at his heels.

     It was a cosy, well-furnished apartment, with two candles burning
     upon the table and two upon the mantelpiece. In the corner, stooping
     over a desk, there sat what appeared to be a little girl. Her face
     was turned away as we entered, but we could see that she was dressed
     in a red frock, and that she had long white gloves on. As she whisked
     round to us, I gave a cry of surprise and horror. The face which she
     turned towards us was of the strangest livid tint, and the features
     were absolutely devoid of any expression. An instant later the
     mystery was explained. Holmes, with a laugh, passed his hand behind
     the child's ear, a mask peeled off from her countenance, an there was
     a little coal black negress, with all her white teeth flashing in
     amusement at our amazed faces. I burst out laughing, out of sympathy
     with her merriment; but Grant Munro stood staring, with his hand
     clutching his throat.

     "My God!" he cried. "What can be the meaning of this?"

     "I will tell you the meaning of it," cried the lady, sweeping into
     the room with a proud, set face. "You have forced me, against my own
     judgment, to tell you, and now we must both make the best of it. My
     husband died at Atlanta. My child survived."

     "Your child?"

     She drew a large silver locket from her bosom. "You have never seen
     this open."

     "I understood that it did not open."

     She touched a spring, and the front hinged back. There was a portrait
     within of a man strikingly handsome and intelligent-looking, but
     bearing unmistakable signs upon his features of his African descent.

     "That is John Hebron, of Atlanta," said the lady, "and a nobler man
     never walked the earth. I cut myself off from my race in order to wed
     him, but never once while he lived did I for an instant regret it. It
     was our misfortune that our only child took after his people rather
     than mine. It is often so in such matches, and little Lucy is darker
     far than ever her father was.  But dark or fair, she is my own dear
     little girlie, and her mother's pet." The little creature ran across
     at the words and nestled up against the lady's dress. "When I left
     her in America," she continued, "it was only because her health was
     weak, and the change might have done her harm. She was given to the
     care of a faithful Scotch woman who had once been our servant. Never
     for an instant did I dream of disowning her as my child. But when
     chance threw you in my way, Jack, and I learned to love you, I feared
     to tell you about my child. God forgive me, I feared that I should
     lose you, and I had not the courage to tell you. I had to choose
     between you, and in my weakness I turned away from my own little
     girl. For three years I have kept her existence a secret from you,
     but I heard from the nurse, and I knew that all was well with her. At
     last, however, there came an overwhelming desire to see the child
     once more. I struggled against it, but in vain. Though I knew the
     danger, I determined to have the child over, if it were but for a few
     weeks. I sent a hundred pounds to the nurse, and I gave her
     instructions about this cottage, so that she might come as a
     neighbor, without my appearing to be in any way connected with her. I
     pushed my precautions so far as to order her to keep the child in the
     house during the daytime, and to cover up her little face and hands
     so that even those who might see her at the window should not gossip
     about there being a black child in the neighborhood. If I had been
     less cautious I might have been more wise, but I was half crazy with
     fear that you should learn the truth.

     "It was you who told me first that the cottage was occupied. I should
     have waited for the morning, but I could not sleep for excitement,
     and so at last I slipped out, knowing how difficult it is to awake
     you. But you saw me go, and that was the beginning of my troubles.
     Next day you had my secret at your mercy, but you nobly refrained
     from pursuing your advantage. Three days later, however, the nurse
     and child only just escaped from the back door as you rushed in at
     the front one. And now to-night you at last know all, and I ask you
     what is to become of us, my child and me?" She clasped her hands and
     waited for an answer.

     It was a long ten minutes before Grant Munro broke the silence, and
     when his answer came it was one of which I love to think. He lifted
     the little child, kissed her, and then, still carrying her, he held
     his other hand out to his wife and turned towards the door.

     "We can talk it over more comfortably at home," said he. "I am not a
     very good man, Effie, but I think that I am a better one than you
     have given me credit for being."

     Holmes and I followed them down the lane, and my friend plucked at my
     sleeve as we came out.

     "I think," said he, "that we shall be of more use in London than in
     Norbury."

     Not another word did he say of the case until late that night, when
     he was turning away, with his lighted candle, for his bedroom.

     "Watson," said he, "if it should ever strike you that I am getting a
     little over-confident in my powers, or giving less pains to a case
     than it deserves, kindly whisper 'Norbury' in my ear, and I shall be
     infinitely obliged to you." 






                            THE STOCK-BROKER'S CLERK

     Shortly after my marriage I had bought a connection in the Paddington
     district. Old Mr. Farquhar, from whom I purchased it, had at one time
     an excellent general practice; but his age, and an affliction of the
     nature of St. Vitus's dance from which he suffered, had very much
     thinned it. The public not unnaturally goes on the principle that he
     who would heal others must himself be whole, and looks askance at the
     curative powers of the man whose own case is beyond the reach of his
     drugs. Thus as my predecessor weakened his practice declined, until
     when I purchased it from him it had sunk from twelve hundred to
     little more than three hundred a year. I had confidence, however, in
     my own youth and energy, and was convinced that in a very few years
     the concern would be as flourishing as ever.

     For three months after taking over the practice I was kept very
     closely at work, and saw little of my friend Sherlock Holmes, for I
     was too busy to visit Baker Street, and he seldom went anywhere
     himself save upon professional business. I was surprised, therefore,
     when, one morning in June, as I sat reading the British Medical
     Journal after breakfast, I heard a ring at the bell, followed by the
     high, somewhat strident tones of my old companion's voice.

     "Ah, my dear Watson," said he, striding into the room, "I am very
     delighted to see you! I trust that Mrs. Watson has entirely recovered
     from all the little excitements connected with our adventure of the
     Sign of Four."

     "Thank you, we are both very well," said I, shaking him warmly by the
     hand.

     "And I hope, also," he continued, sitting down in the rocking-chair,
     "that the cares of medical practice have not entirely obliterated the
     interest which you used to take in our little deductive problems."

     "On the contrary," I answered, "it was only last night that I was
     looking over my old notes, and classifying some of our past results."

     "I trust that you don't consider your collection closed."

     "Not at all. I should wish nothing better than to have some more of
     such experiences."

     "To-day, for example?"

     "Yes, to-day, if you like."

     "And as far off as Birmingham?"

     "Certainly, if you wish it."

     "And the practice?"

     "I do my neighbor's when he goes. He is always ready to work off the
     debt."

     "Ha! Nothing could be better," said Holmes, leaning back in his chair
     and looking keenly at me from under his half closed lids. "I perceive
     that you have been unwell lately. Summer colds are always a little
     trying."

     "I was confined to the house by a sever chill for three days last
     week. I thought, however, that I had cast off every trace of it."

     "So you have. You look remarkably robust."

     "How, then, did you know of it?"

     "My dear fellow, you know my methods."

     "You deduced it, then?"

     "Certainly."

     "And from what?"

     "From your slippers."

     I glanced down at the new patent leathers which I was wearing. "How
     on earth--" I began, but Holmes answered my question before it was
     asked.

     "Your slippers are new," he said. "You could not have had them more
     than a few weeks. The soles which you are at this moment presenting
     to me are slightly scorched. For a moment I thought they might have
     got wet and been burned in the drying. But near the instep there is a
     small circular wafer of paper with the shopman's hieroglyphics upon
     it. Damp would of course have removed this. You had, then, been
     sitting with our feet outstretched to the fire, which a man would
     hardly do even in so wet a June as this if he were in his full
     health."

     Like all Holmes's reasoning the thing seemed simplicity itself when
     it was once explained. He read the thought upon my features, and his
     smile had a tinge of bitterness.

     "I am afraid that I rather give myself away when I explain," said he.
     "Results without causes are much more impressive. You are ready to
     come to Birmingham, then?"

     "Certainly. What is the case?"

     "You shall hear it all in the train. My client is outside in a
     four-wheeler. Can you come at once?"

     "In an instant." I scribbled a note to my neighbor, rushed upstairs
     to explain the matter to my wife, and joined Holmes upon the
     door-step.

     "Your neighbor is a doctor," said he, nodding at the brass plate.

     "Yes; he bought a practice as I did."

     "An old-established one?"

     "Just the same as mine. Both have been ever since the houses were
     built."

     "Ah! Then you got hold of the best of the two."

     "I think I did. But how do you know?"

     "By the steps, my boy. Yours are worn three inches deeper than his.
     But this gentleman in the cab is my client, Mr. Hall Pycroft. Allow
     me to introduce you to him. Whip your horse up, cabby, for we have
     only just time to catch our train."

     The man whom I found myself facing was a well built,
     fresh-complexioned young fellow, with a frank, honest face and a
     slight, crisp, yellow mustache. He wore a very shiny top hat and a
     neat suit of sober black, which made him look what he was--a smart
     young City man, of the class who have been labeled cockneys, but who
     give us our crack volunteer regiments, and who turn out more fine
     athletes and sportsmen than any body of men in these islands. His
     round, ruddy face was naturally full of cheeriness, but the corners
     of his mouth seemed to me to be pulled down in a half-comical
     distress. It was not, however, until we were all in a first-class
     carriage and well started upon our journey to Birmingham that I was
     able to learn what the trouble was which had driven him to Sherlock
     Holmes.

     "We have a clear run here of seventy minutes," Holmes remarked. "I
     want you, Mr. Hall Pycroft, to tell my friend your very interesting
     experience exactly as you have told it to me, or with more detail if
     possible.  It will be of use to me to hear the succession of events
     again. It is a case, Watson, which may prove to have something in it,
     or may prove to have nothing, but which, at least, presents those
     unusual and outr?features which are as dear to you as they are to
     me. Now, Mr. Pycroft, I shall not interrupt you again."

     Our young companion looked at me with a twinkle in his eye.

     "The worst of the story is," said he, "that I show myself up as such
     a confounded fool. Of course it may work out all right, and I don't
     see that I could have done otherwise; but if I have lost my crib and
     get nothing in exchange I shall feel what a soft Johnnie I have been.
     I'm not very good at telling a story, Dr. Watson, but it is like this
     with me:

     "I used to have a billet at Coxon & Woodhouse's, of Draper's Gardens,
     but they were let in early in the spring through the Venezuelan loan,
     as no doubt you remember, and came a nasty cropper. I had been with
     them five years, and old Coxon gave me a ripping good testimonial
     when the smash came, but of course we clerks were all turned adrift,
     the twenty-seven of us. I tried here and tried there, but there were
     lots of other chaps on the same lay as myself, and it was a perfect
     frost for a long time. I had been taking three pounds a week at
     Coxon's, and I had saved about seventy of them, but I soon worked my
     way through that and out at the other end. I was fairly at the end of
     my tether at last, and could hardly find the stamps to answer the
     advertisements or the envelopes to stick them to. I had worn out my
     boots paddling up office stairs, and I seemed just as far from
     getting a billet as ever.

     "At last I saw a vacancy at Mawson & Williams's, the great
     stock-broking firm in Lombard Street. I dare say E. C. is not much in
     your line, but I can tell you that this is about the richest house in
     London. The advertisement was to be answered by letter only. I sent
     in my testimonial and application, but without the least hope of
     getting it. Back came an answer by return, saying that if I would
     appear next Monday I might take over my new duties at once, provided
     that my appearance was satisfactory. No one knows how these things
     are worked. Some people say that the manager just plunges his hand
     into the heap and takes the first that comes. Anyhow it was my
     innings that time, and I don't ever wish to feel better pleased. The
     screw was a pound a week rise, and the duties just about the same as
     at Coxon's.

     "And now I come to the queer part of the business. I was in diggings
     out Hampstead way, 17 Potter's Terrace. Well, I was sitting doing a
     smoke that very evening after I had been promised the appointment,
     when up came my landlady with a card which had "Arthur Pinner,
     Financial Agent," printed upon it. I had never heard the name before
     and could not imagine what he wanted with me; but, of course, I asked
     her to show him up. In he walked, a middle-sized, dark-haired,
     dark-eyed, black-bearded man, with a touch of the sheeny about his
     nose. He had a brisk kind of way with him and spoke sharply, like a
     man who knew the value of time.

     "'Mr. Hall Pycroft, I believe?' said he.

     "'Yes, sir,' I answered, pushing a chair towards him.

     "'Lately engaged at Coxon & Woodhouse's?'

     "'Yes, sir.'

     "'And now on the staff of Mawson's.'

     "'Quite so.'

     "'Well,' said he, 'the fact is that I have heard some really
     extraordinary stories about your financial ability. You remember
     Parker, who used to be Coxon's manager? He can never say enough about
     it.'

     "Of course I was pleased to hear this. I had always been pretty sharp
     in the office, but I had never dreamed that I was talked about in the
     City in this fashion.

     "'You have a good memory?' said he.

     "'Pretty fair,' I answered, modestly.

     "'Have you kept in touch with the market while you have been out of
     work?' he asked.

     "'Yes. I read the stock exchange list every morning.'

     "'Now that shows real application!' he cried. 'That is the way to
     prosper! You won't mind my testing you, will you? Let me see. How are
     Ayrshires?'

     "'A hundred and six and a quarter to a hundred and five and
     seven-eighths.'

     "'And New Zealand consolidated?'

     "'A hundred and four.'

     "'And British Broken Hills?'

     "'Seven to seven-and-six.'

     "'Wonderful!' he cried, with his hands up. 'This quite fits in with
     all that I had heard. My boy, my boy, you are very much too good to
     be a clerk at Mawson's!'

     "This outburst rather astonished me, as you can think. 'Well,' said
     I, 'other people don't think quite so much of me as you seem to do,
     Mr. Pinner. I had a hard enough fight to get this berth, and I am
     very glad to have it.'

     "'Pooh, man; you should soar above it. You are not in your true
     sphere. Now, I'll tell you how it stands with me. What I have to
     offer is little enough when measured by your ability, but when
     compared with Mawson's, it's light to dark. Let me see. When do you
     go to Mawson's?'

     "'On Monday.'

     "'Ha, ha! I think I would risk a little sporting flutter that you
     don't go there at all.'

     "'Not go to Mawson's?'

     "'No, sir. By that day you will be the business manager of the
     Franco-Midland Hardware Company, Limited, with a hundred and
     thirty-four branches in the towns and villages of France, not
     counting one in Brussels and one in San Remo.'

     "This took my breath away. 'I never heard of it,' said I.

     "'Very likely not. It has been kept very quiet, for the capital was
     all privately subscribed, and it's too good a thing to let the public
     into. My brother, Harry Pinner, is promoter, and joins the board
     after allotment as managing director. He knew I was in the swim down
     here, and asked me to pick up a good man cheap. A young, pushing man
     with plenty of snap about him. Parker spoke of you, and that brought
     me here tonight. We can only offer you a beggarly five hundred to
     start with.'

     "'Five hundred a year!' I shouted.

     "'Only that at the beginning; but you are to have an overriding
     commission of one per cent on all business done by your agents, and
     you may take my word for it that this will come to more than your
     salary.'

     "'But I know nothing about hardware.'

     "'Tut, my boy; you know about figures.'

     "My head buzzed, and I could hardly sit still in my chair. But
     suddenly a little chill of doubt came upon me.

     "'I must be frank with you,' said I. 'Mawson only gives me two
     hundred, but Mawson is safe. Now, really, I know so little about your
     company that--'

     "'Ah, smart, smart!' he cried, in a kind of ecstasy of delight. 'You
     are the very man for us. You are not to be talked over, and quite
     right, too. Now, here's a note for a hundred pounds, and if you think
     that we can do business you may just slip it into your pocket as an
     advance upon your salary.'

     "'That is very handsome,' said I. 'When should I take over my new
     duties?'

     "'Be in Birmingham to-morrow at one,' said he. 'I have a note in my
     pocket here which you will take to my brother. You will find him at
     126b Corporation Street, where the temporary offices of the company
     are situated. Of course he must confirm your engagement, but between
     ourselves it will be all right.'

     "'Really, I hardly know how to express my gratitude, Mr. Pinner,'
     said I.

     "'Not at all, my boy. You have only got your desserts. There are one
     or two small things--mere formalities--which I must arrange with you.
     You have a bit of paper beside you there. Kindly write upon it "I am
     perfectly willing to act as business manager to the Franco-Midland
     Hardware Company, Limited, at a minimum salary of ?00."'

     "I did as he asked, and he put the paper in his pocket.

     "'There is one other detail,' said he. 'What do you intend to do
     about Mawson's?'

     "I had forgotten all about Mawson's in my joy. 'I'll write and
     resign,' said I.

     "'Precisely what I don't want you to do. I had a row over you with
     Mawson's manager. I had gone up to ask him about you, and he was very
     offensive; accused me of coaxing you away from the service of the
     firm, and that sort of thing. At last I fairly lost my temper. "If
     you want good men you should pay them a good price," said I.

     "'"He would rather have our small price than your big one," said he.

     "'"I'll lay you a fiver," said I, "that when he has my offer you'll
     never so much as hear from him again."

     "'"Done!" said he. "We picked him out of the gutter, and he won't
     leave us so easily." Those were his very words.'

     "'The impudent scoundrel!' I cried. 'I've never so much as seen him
     in my life. Why should I consider him in any way? I shall certainly
     not write if you would rather I didn't.'

     "'Good! That's a promise,' said he, rising from his chair. 'Well, I'm
     delighted to have got so good a man for my brother. Here's your
     advance of a hundred pounds, and here is the letter. Make a note of
     the address, 126b Corporation Street, and remember that one o'clock
     to-morrow is your appointment. Good-night; and may you have all the
     fortune that you deserve!'

     "That's just about all that passed between us, as near as I can
     remember. You can imagine, Dr. Watson, how pleased I was at such an
     extraordinary bit of good fortune. I sat up half the night hugging
     myself over it, and next day I was off to Birmingham in a train that
     would take me in plenty time for my appointment. I took my things to
     a hotel in New Street, and then I made my way to the address which
     had been given me.

     "It was a quarter of an hour before my time, but I thought that would
     make no difference. 126b was a passage between two large shops, which
     led to a winding stone stair, from which there were many flats, let
     as offices to companies or professional men. The names of the
     occupants were painted at the bottom on the wall, but there was no
     such name as the Franco-Midland Hardware Company, Limited. I stood
     for a few minutes with my heart in my boots, wondering whether the
     whole thing was an elaborate hoax or not, when up came a man and
     addressed me. He was very like the chap I had seen the night before,
     the same figure and voice, but he was clean shaven and his hair was
     lighter.

     "'Are you Mr. Hall Pycroft?' he asked.

     "'Yes,' said I.

     "'Oh! I was expecting you, but you are a trifle before your time. I
     had a note from my brother this morning in which he sang your praises
     very loudly.'

     "'I was just looking for the offices when you came.'

     "'We have not got our name up yet, for we only secured these
     temporary premises last week. Come up with me, and we will talk the
     matter over.'

     "I followed him to the top of a very lofty stair, and there, right
     under the slates, were a couple of empty, dusty little rooms,
     uncarpeted and uncurtained, into which he led me. I had thought of a
     great office with shining tables and rows of clerks, such as I was
     used to, and I dare say I stared rather straight at the two deal
     chairs and one little table, which, with a ledger and a waste paper
     basket, made up the whole furniture.

     "'Don't be disheartened, Mr. Pycroft,' said my new acquaintance,
     seeing the length of my face. 'Rome was not built in a day, and we
     have lots of money at our backs, though we don't cut much dash yet in
     offices. Pray sit down, and let me have your letter.'

     "I gave it to him, and her read it over very carefully.

     "'You seem to have made a vast impression upon my brother Arthur,'
     said he; 'and I know that he is a pretty shrewd judge. Hew swears by
     London, you know; and I by Birmingham; but this time I shall follow
     his advice. Pray consider yourself definitely engaged.'

     "'What are my duties?' I asked.

     "'You will eventually manage the great depot in Paris, which will
     pour a flood of English crockery into the shops of a hundred and
     thirty-four agents in France. The purchase will be completed in a
     week, and meanwhile you will remain in Birmingham and make yourself
     useful.'

     "'How?'

     "For answer, he took a big red book out of a drawer.

     "'This is a directory of Paris,' said he, 'with the trades after the
     names of the people. I want you to take it home with you, and to mark
     off all the hardware sellers, with their addresses. It would be of
     the greatest use to me to have them.'

     "'Surely there are classified lists?' I suggested.

     "'Not reliable ones. Their system is different from ours. Stick at
     it, and let me have the lists by Monday, at twelve. Good-day, Mr.
     Pycroft. If you continue to show zeal and intelligence you will find
     the company a good master.'

     "I went back to the hotel with the big book under my arm, and with
     very conflicting feelings in my breast. On the one hand, I was
     definitely engaged and had a hundred pounds in my pocket; on the
     other, the look of the offices, the absence of name on the wall, and
     other of the points which would strike a business man had left a bad
     impression as to the position of my employers. However, come what
     might, I had my money, so I settled down to my task. All Sunday I was
     kept hard at work, and yet by Monday I had only got as far as H. I
     went round to my employer, found him in the same dismantled kind of
     room, and was told to keep at it until Wednesday, and then come
     again. On Wednesday it was still unfinished, so I hammered away until
     Friday--that is, yesterday. Then I brought it round to Mr. Harry
     Pinner.

     "'Thank you very much,' said he; 'I fear that I underrated the
     difficulty of the task. This list will be of very material assistance
     to me.'

     "'It took some time,' said I.

     "'And now,' said he, 'I want you to make a list of the furniture
     shops, for they all sell crockery.'

     "'Very good.'

     "'And you can come up to-morrow evening, at seven, and let me know
     how you are getting on. Don't overwork yourself. A couple of hours at
     Day's Music Hall in the evening would do you no harm after your
     labors.' He laughed as he spoke, and I saw with a thrill that his
     second tooth upon the left-hand side had been very badly stuffed with
     gold."

     Sherlock Holmes rubbed his hands with delight, and I stared with
     astonishment at our client.

     "You may well look surprised, Dr. Watson; but it is this way," said
     he: "When I was speaking to the other chap in London, at the time
     that he laughed at my not going to Mawson's, I happened to notice
     that his tooth was stuffed in this very identical fashion. The glint
     of the gold in each case caught my eye, you see. When I put that with
     the voice and figure being the same, and only those things altered
     which might be changed by a razor or a wig, I could not doubt that it
     was the same man. Of course you expect two brothers to be alike, but
     not that they should have the same tooth stuffed in the same way. He
     bowed me out, and I found myself in the street, hardly knowing
     whether I was on my head or my heels. Back I went to my hotel, put my
     head in a basin of cold water, and tried to think it out. Why had he
     sent me from London to Birmingham? Why had he got there before me?
     And why had he written a letter from himself to himself? It was
     altogether too much for me, and I could make no sense of it. And then
     suddenly it struck me that what was dark to me might be very light to
     Mr. Sherlock Holmes. I had just time to get up to town by the night
     train to see him this morning, and to bring you both back with me to
     Birmingham."

     There was a pause after the stock-broker's clerk had concluded his
     surprising experience. Then Sherlock Holmes cocked his eye at me,
     leaning back on the cushions with a pleased and yet critical face,
     like a connoisseur who has just taken his first sip of a comet
     vintage.

     "Rather fine, Watson, is it not?" said he. "There are points in it
     which please me. I think that you will agree with me that an
     interview with Mr. Arthur Harry Pinner in the temporary offices of
     the Franco-Midland Hardware Company, Limited, would be a rather
     interesting experience for both of us."

     "But how can we do it?" I asked.

     "Oh, easily enough," said Hall Pycroft, cheerily. "You are two
     friends of mine who are in want of a billet, and what could be more
     natural than that I should bring you both round to the managing
     director?"

     "Quite so, of course," said Holmes. "I should like to have a look at
     the gentleman, and see if I can make anything of his little game.
     What qualities have you, my friend, which would make your services so
     valuable? Or is it possible that--" He began biting his nails and
     staring blankly out of the window, and we hardly drew another word
     from him until we were in New Street.

     At seven o'clock that evening we were walking, the three of us, down
     Corporation Street to the company's offices.

     "It is no use our being at all before our time," said our client. "He
     only comes there to see me, apparently, for the place is deserted up
     to the very hour he names."

     "That is suggestive," remarked Holmes.

     "By Jove, I told you so!" cried the clerk. "That's he walking ahead
     of us there."

     He pointed to a smallish, dark, well-dressed man who was bustling
     along the other side of the road. As we watched him he looked across
     at a boy who was bawling out the latest edition of the evening paper,
     and running over among the cabs and busses, he bought one from him.
     Then, clutching it in his hand, he vanished through a door-way.

     "There he goes!" cried Hall Pycroft. "These are the company's offices
     into which he has gone. Come with me, and I'll fix it up as easily as
     possible."

     Following his lead, we ascended five stories, until we found
     ourselves outside a half-opened door, at which our client tapped. A
     voice within bade us enter, and we entered a bare, unfurnished room
     such as Hall Pycroft had described. At the single table sat the man
     whom we had seen in the street, with his evening paper spread out in
     front of him, and as he looked up at us it seemed to me that I had
     never looked upon a face which bore such marks of grief, and of
     something beyond grief--of a horror such as comes to few men in a
     lifetime. His brow glistened with perspiration, his cheeks were of
     the dull, dead white of a fish's belly, and his eyes were wild and
     staring. He looked at his clerk as though he failed to recognize him,
     and I could see by the astonishment depicted upon our conductor's
     face that this was by no means the usual appearance of his employer.

     "You look ill, Mr. Pinner!" he exclaimed.

     "Yes, I am not very well," answered the other, making obvious efforts
     to pull himself together, and licking his dry lips before he spoke.
     "Who are these gentlemen whom you have brought with you?"

     "One is Mr. Harris, of Bermondsey, and the other is Mr. Price, of
     this town," said our clerk, glibly. "They are friends of mine and
     gentlemen of experience, but they have been out of a place for some
     little time, and they hoped that perhaps you might find an opening
     for them in the company's employment."

     "Very possibly! Very possibly!" cried Mr. Pinner with a ghastly
     smile. "Yes, I have no doubt that we shall be able to do something
     for you. What is your particular line, Mr. Harris?"

     "I am an accountant," said Holmes.

     "Ah yes, we shall want something of the sort. And you, Mr. Price?"

     "A clerk," said I.

     "I have every hope that the company may accommodate you. I will let
     you know about it as soon as we come to any conclusion. And now I beg
     that you will go. For God's sake leave me to myself!"

     These last words were shot out of him, as though the constraint which
     he was evidently setting upon himself had suddenly and utterly burst
     asunder. Holmes and I glanced at each other, and Hall Pycroft took a
     step towards the table.

     "You forget, Mr. Pinner, that I am here by appointment to receive
     some directions from you," said he.

     "Certainly, Mr. Pycroft, certainly," the other resumed in a calmer
     tone. "You may wait here a moment; and there is no reason why your
     friends should not wait with you. I will be entirely at your service
     in three minutes, if I might trespass upon your patience so far." He
     rose with a very courteous air, and, bowing to us, he passed out
     through a door at the farther end of the room, which he closed behind
     him.

     "What now?" whispered Holmes. "Is he giving us the slip?"

     "Impossible," answered Pycroft.

     "Why so?"

     "That door leads into an inner room."

     "There is no exit?"

     "None."

     "Is it furnished?"

     "It was empty yesterday."

     "Then what on earth can he be doing? There is something which I don't
     understand in his manner. If ever a man was three parts mad with
     terror, that man's name is Pinner. What can have put the shivers on
     him?"

     "He suspects that we are detectives," I suggested.

     "That's it," cried Pycroft.

     Holmes shook his head. "He did not turn pale. He was pale when we
     entered the room," said he. "It is just possible that--"

     His words were interrupted by a sharp rat-tat from the direction of
     the inner door.

     "What the deuce is he knocking at his own door for?" cried the clerk.

     Again and much louder cam the rat-tat-tat. We all gazed expectantly
     at the closed door. Glancing at Holmes, I saw his face turn rigid,
     and he leaned forward in intense excitement. Then suddenly came a low
     guggling, gargling sound, and a brisk drumming upon woodwork. Holmes
     sprang frantically across the room and pushed at the door. It was
     fastened on the inner side. Following his example, we threw ourselves
     upon it with all our weight. One hinge snapped, then the other, and
     down came the door with a crash. Rushing over it, we found ourselves
     in the inner room. It was empty.

     But it was only for a moment that we were at fault. At one corner,
     the corner nearest the room which we had left, there was a second
     door. Holmes sprang to it and pulled it open. A coat and waistcoat
     were lying on the floor, and from a hook behind the door, with his
     own braces round his neck, was hanging the managing director of the
     Franco-Midland Hardware Company. His knees were drawn up, his head
     hung at a dreadful angle to his body, and the clatter of his heels
     against the door made the noise which had broken in upon our
     conversation. In an instant I had caught him round the waist, and
     held him up while Holmes and Pycroft untied the elastic bands which
     had disappeared between the livid creases of skin. Then we carried
     him into the other room, where he lay with a clay-colored face,
     puffing his purple lips in and out with every breath--a dreadful
     wreck of all that he had been but five minutes before.

     "What do you think of him, Watson?" asked Holmes.

     I stooped over him and examined him. His pulse was feeble and
     intermittent, but his breathing grew longer, and there was a little
     shivering of his eyelids, which showed a thin white slit of ball
     beneath.

     "It has been touch and go with him," said I, "but he'll live now.
     Just open that window, and hand me the water carafe." I undid his
     collar, poured the cold water over his face, and raised and sank his
     arms until he drew a long, natural breath. "It's only a question of
     time now," said I, as I turned away from him.

     Holmes stood by the table, with his hands deep in his trouser's
     pockets and his chin upon his breast.

     "I suppose we ought to call the police in now," said he. "And yet I
     confess that I'd like to give them a complete case when they come."

     "It's a blessed mystery to me," cried Pycroft, scratching his head.
     "Whatever they wanted to bring me all the way up here for, and
     then--"

     "Pooh! All that is clear enough," said Holmes impatiently. "It is
     this last sudden move."

     "You understand the rest, then?"

     "I think that it is fairly obvious. What do you say, Watson?"

     I shrugged my shoulders. "I must confess that I am out of my depths,"
     said I.

     "Oh surely if you consider the events at first they can only point to
     one conclusion."

     "What do you make of them?"

     "Well, the whole thing hinges upon two points. The first is the
     making of Pycroft write a declaration by which he entered the service
     of this preposterous company. Do you not see how very suggestive that
     is?"

     "I am afraid I miss the point."

     "Well, why did they want him to do it? Not as a business matter, for
     these arrangements are usually verbal, and there was no earthly
     business reason why this should be an exception. Don't you see, my
     young friend, that they were very anxious to obtain a specimen of
     your handwriting, and had no other way of doing it?"

     "And why?"

     "Quite so. Why? When we answer that we have made some progress with
     our little problem. Why? There can be only one adequate reason.
     Someone wanted to learn to imitate your writing, and had to procure a
     specimen of it first. And now if we pass on to the second point we
     find that each throws light upon the other. That point is the request
     made by Pinner that you should not resign your place, but should
     leave the manager of this important business in the full expectation
     that a Mr. Hall Pycroft, whom he had never seen, was about to enter
     the office upon the Monday morning."

     "My God!" cried our client, "what a blind beetle I have been!"

     "Now you see the point about the handwriting. Suppose that some one
     turned up in your place who wrote a completely different hand from
     that in which you had applied for the vacancy, of course the game
     would have been up. But in the interval the rogue had learned to
     imitate you, and his position was therefore secure, as I presume that
     nobody in the office had ever set eyes upon you."

     "Not a soul," groaned Hall Pycroft.

     "Very good. Of course it was of the utmost importance to prevent you
     from thinking better of it, and also to keep you from coming into
     contact with any one who might tell you that your double was at work
     in Mawson's office. Therefore they gave you a handsome advance on
     your salary, and ran you off to the Midlands, where they gave you
     enough work to do to prevent your going to London, where you might
     have burst their little game up. That is all plain enough."

     "But why should this man pretend to be his own brother?"

     "Well, that is pretty clear also. There are evidently only two of
     them in it. The other is impersonating you at the office. This one
     acted as your engager, and then found that he could not find you an
     employer without admitting a third person into his plot. That he was
     most unwilling to do. He changed his appearance as far as he could,
     and trusted that the likeness, which you could not fail to observe,
     would be put down to a family resemblance. But for the happy chance
     of the gold stuffing, your suspicions would probably never have been
     aroused."

     Hall Pycroft shook his clinched hands in the air.  "Good Lord!" he
     cried, "while I have been fooled in this way, what has this other
     Hall Pycroft been doing at Mawson's? What should we do, Mr. Holmes?
     Tell me what to do."

     "We must wire to Mawson's."

     "They shut at twelve on Saturdays."

     "Never mind. There may be some door-keeper or attendant--"

     "Ah yes, they keep a permanent guard there on account of the value of
     the securities that they hold. I remember hearing it talked of in the
     City."

     "Very good; we shall wire to him, and see if all is well, and if a
     clerk of your name is working there. That is clear enough; but what
     is not so clear is why at sight of us one of the rogues should
     instantly walk out of the room and hang himself."

     "The paper!" croaked a voice behind us. The man was sitting up,
     blanched and ghastly, with returning reason in his eyes, and hands
     which rubbed nervously at the broad red band which still encircled
     his throat.

     "The paper! Of course!" yelled Holmes, in a paroxysm of excitement.
     "Idiot that I was! I thought so must of our visit that the paper
     never entered my head for an instant. To be sure, the secret must be
     there." He flattened it out upon the table, and a cry of triumph
     burst from his lips. "Look at this, Watson," he cried. "It is a
     London paper, an early edition of the Evening Standard. Here is what
     we want. Look at the headlines: 'Crime in the City. Murder at Mawson
     & Williams's. Gigantic attempted Robbery. Capture of the Criminal.'
     Here, Watson, we are all equally anxious to hear it, so kindly read
     it aloud to us."

     It appeared from its position in the paper to have been the one event
     of importance in town, and the account of it ran in this way:

     "A desperate attempt at robbery, culminating in the death of one man
     and the capture of the criminal, occurred this afternoon in the City.
     For some time back Mawson & Williams, the famous financial house,
     have been the guardians of securities which amount in the aggregate
     to a sum of considerably over a million sterling. So conscious was
     the manager of the responsibility which devolved upon him in
     consequence of the great interests at stake that safes of the very
     latest construction have been employed, and an armed watchman has
     been left day and night in the building. It appears that last week a
     new clerk named Hall Pycroft was engaged by the firm. This person
     appears to have been none other that Beddington, the famous forger
     and cracksman, who, with his brother, had only recently emerged from
     a five years' spell of penal servitude. By some mean, which are not
     yet clear, he succeeded in winning, under a false name, this official
     position in the office, which he utilized in order to obtain moulding
     of various locks, and a thorough knowledge of the position of the
     strong room and the safes.
     "It is customary at Mawson's for the clerks to leave at midday on
     Saturday. Sergeant Tuson, of the City Police, was somewhat surprised,
     therefore to see a gentleman with a carpet bag come down the steps at
     twenty minutes past one. His suspicions being aroused, the sergeant
     followed the man, and with the aid of Constable Pollack succeeded,
     after a most desperate resistance, in arresting him. It was at once
     clear that a daring and gigantic robbery had been committed. Nearly a
     hundred thousand pounds' worth of American railway bonds, with a
     large amount of scrip in mines and other companies, was discovered in
     the bag. On examining the premises the body of the unfortunate
     watchman was found doubled up and thrust into the largest of the
     safes, where it would not have been discovered until Monday morning
     had it not been for the prompt action of Sergeant Tuson. The man's
     skull had been shattered by a blow from a poker delivered from
     behind. There could be no doubt that Beddington had obtained entrance
     by pretending that he had left something behind him, and having
     murdered the watchman, rapidly rifled the large safe, and then made
     off with his booty. His brother, who usually works with him, has not
     appeared in this job as far as can at present be ascertained,
     although the police are making energetic inquiries as to his
     whereabouts."

     "Well, we may save the police some little trouble in that direction,"
     said Holmes, glancing at the haggard figure huddled up by the window.
     "Human nature is a strange mixture, Watson. You see that even a
     villain and murderer can inspire such affection that his brother
     turns to suicide when he learns that his neck is forfeited. However,
     we have no choice as to our action. The doctor and I will remain on
     guard, Mr. Pycroft, if you will have the kindness to step out for the
     police."






                               THE "GLORIA SCOTT"

     "I have some papers here," said my friend Sherlock Holmes, as we sat
     one winter's night on either side of the fire, "which I really think,
     Watson, that it would be worth your while to glance over. These are
     the documents in the extraordinary case of the Gloria Scott, and this
     is the message which struck Justice of the Peace Trevor dead with
     horror when he read it."

     He had picked from a drawer a little tarnished cylinder, and, undoing
     the tape, he handed me a short note scrawled upon a half-sheet of
     slate gray-paper.

     "The supply of game for London is going steadily up," it ran.
     "Head-keeper Hudson, we believe, had been now told to receive all
     orders for fly-paper and for preservation of your hen-pheasant's
     life."

     As I glanced up from reading this enigmatical message, I saw Holmes
     chuckling at the expression upon my face.

     "You look a little bewildered," said he.

     "I cannot see how such a message as this could inspire horror. It
     seems to me to be rather grotesque than otherwise."

     "Very likely. Yet the fact remains that the reader, who was a fine,
     robust old man, was knocked clean down by it as if it had been the
     butt end of a pistol."

     "You arouse my curiosity," said I. "But why did you say just now that
     there were very particular reasons why I should study this case?"

     "Because it was the first in which I was ever engaged."

     I had often endeavored to elicit from my companion what had first
     turned his mind in the direction of criminal research, but had never
     caught him before in a communicative humor. Now he sat forward in
     this arm chair and spread out the documents upon his knees. Then he
     lit his pipe and sat for some time smoking and turning them over.

     "You never heard me talk of Victor Trevor?" he asked. "He was the
     only friend I made during the two years I was at college. I was never
     a very sociable fellow, Watson, always rather fond of moping in my
     rooms and working out my own little methods of thought, so that I
     never mixed much with the men of my year. Bar fencing and boxing I
     had few athletic tastes, and then my line of study was quite distinct
     from that of the other fellows, so that we had no points of contact
     at all. Trevor was the only man I knew, and that only through the
     accident of his bull terrier freezing on to my ankle one morning as I
     went down to chapel.

     "It was a prosaic way of forming a friendship, but it was effective.
     I was laid by the heels for ten days, but Trevor used to come in to
     inquire after me. At first it was only a minute's chat, but soon his
     visits lengthened, and before the end of the term we were close
     friends. He was a hearty, full-blooded fellow, full of spirits and
     energy, the very opposite to me in most respects, but we had some
     subjects in common, and it was a bond of union when I found that he
     was as friendless as I. Finally, he invited me down to his father's
     place at Donnithorpe, in Norfolk, and I accepted his hospitality for
     a month of the long vacation.

     "Old Trevor was evidently a man of some wealth and consideration, a
     J.P., and a landed proprietor. Donnithorpe is a little hamlet just to
     the north of Langmere, in the country of the Broads. The house was
     and old-fashioned, wide-spread, oak-beamed brick building, with a
     fine lime-lined avenue leading up to it. There was excellent
     wild-duck shooting in the fens, remarkably good fishing, a small but
     select library, taken over, as I understood, from a former occupant,
     and a tolerable cook, so that he would be a fastidious man who could
     not put in a pleasant month there.

     "Trevor senior was a widower, and my friend his only son.

     "There had been a daughter, I heard, but she had died of diphtheria
     while on a visit to Birmingham. The father interested me extremely.
     He was a man of little culture, but with a considerable amount of
     rude strength, both physically and mentally. He knew hardly any
     books, but he had traveled far, had seen much of the world. And had
     remembered all that he had learned. In person he was a thick-set,
     burly man with a shock of grizzled hair, a brown, weather-beaten
     face, and blue eyes which were keen to the verge of fierceness. Yet
     he had a reputation for kindness and charity on the country-side, and
     was noted for the leniency of his sentences from the bench.

     "One evening, shortly after my arrival, we were sitting over a glass
     of port after dinner, when young Trevor began to talk about those
     habits of observation and inference which I had already formed into a
     system, although I had not yet appreciated the part which they were
     to play in my life. The old man evidently thought that his son was
     exaggerating in his description of one or two trivial feats which I
     had performed.

     "'Come, now, Mr. Holmes,' said he, laughing good-humoredly. 'I'm an
     excellent subject, if you can deduce anything from me.'

     "'I fear there is not very much,' I answered; 'I might suggest that
     you have gone about in fear of some personal attack with the last
     twelvemonth.'

     "The laugh faded from his lips, and he stared at me in great
     surprise.

     "'Well, that's true enough,' said he. 'You know, Victor,' turning to
     his son, 'when we broke up that poaching gang they swore to knife us,
     and Sir Edward Holly has actually been attacked. I've always been on
     my guard since then, though I have no idea how you know it.'

     "'You have a very handsome stick,' I answered. 'By the inscription I
     observed that you had not had it more than a year. But you have taken
     some pains to bore the head of it and pour melted lead into the hole
     so as to make it a formidable weapon. I argued that you would not
     take such precautions unless you had some danger to fear.'

     "'Anything else?' he asked, smiling.

     "'You have boxed a good deal in your youth.'

     "'Right again. How did you know it?  Is my nose knocked a little out
     of the straight?'

     "'No,' said I. 'It is your ears. They have the peculiar flattening
     and thickening which marks the boxing man.'

     "'Anything else?'

     "'You have done a good deal of digging by your callosities.'

     "'Made all my money at the gold fields.'

     "'You have been in New Zealand.'

     "'Right again.'

     "'You have visited Japan.'

     "'Quite true.'

     "'And you have been most intimately associated with some one whose
     initials were J. A., and whom you afterwards were eager to entirely
     forget.'

     "Mr. Trevor stood slowly up, fixed his large blue eyes upon me with a
     strange wild stare, and then pitched forward, with his face among the
     nutshells which strewed the cloth, in a dead faint.

     "You can imagine, Watson, how shocked both his son and I were. His
     attack did not last long, however, for when we undid his collar, and
     sprinkled the water from one of the finger-glasses over his face, he
     gave a gasp or two and sat up.

     "'Ah, boys,' said he, forcing a smile, 'I hope I haven't frightened
     you. Strong as I look, there is a weak place in my heart, and it does
     not take much to knock me over. I don't know how you manage this, Mr.
     Holmes, but it seems to me that all the detectives of fact and of
     fancy would be children in your hands. That's your line of life, sir,
     and you may take the word of a man who has seen something of the
     world.'

     "And that recommendation, with the exaggerated estimate of my ability
     with which he prefaced it, was, if you will believe me, Watson, the
     very first thing which ever made me feel that a profession might be
     made out of what had up to that time been the merest hobby. At the
     moment, however, I was too much concerned at the sudden illness of my
     host to think of anything else.

     "'I hope that I have said nothing to pain you?' said I.

     "'Well, you certainly touched upon rather a tender point. Might I ask
     how you know, and how much you know?' He spoke now in a half-jesting
     fashion, but a look of terror still lurked at the back of his eyes.

     "'It is simplicity itself,' said I. 'When you bared your arm to draw
     that fish into the boat I saw that J. A. had been tattooed in the
     bend of the elbow. The letters were still legible, but it was
     perfectly clear from their blurred appearance, and from the staining
     of the skin round them, that efforts had been made to obliterate
     them. It was obvious, then, that those initials had once been very
     familiar to you, and that you had afterwards wished to forget them.'

     "'What an eye you have!' he cried, with a sigh of relief. 'It is just
     as you say. But we won't talk of it. Of all ghosts the ghosts of our
     old lovers are the worst. Come into the billiard-room and have a
     quiet cigar.'

     "From that day, amid all his cordiality, there was always a touch of
     suspicion in Mr. Trevor's manner towards me. Even his son remarked
     it. 'You've given the governor such a turn,' said he, 'that he'll
     never be sure again of what you know and what you don't know.' He did
     not mean to show it, I am sure, but it was so strongly in his mind
     that it peeped out at every action. At last I became so convinced
     that I was causing him uneasiness that I drew my visit to a close. On
     the very day, however, before I left, an incident occurred which
     proved in the sequel to be of importance.

     "We were sitting out upon the lawn on garden chairs, the three of us,
     basking in the sun and admiring the view across the Broads, when a
     maid came out to say that there was a man at the door who wanted to
     see Mr. Trevor.

     "'What is his name?' asked my host.

     "'He would not give any.'

     "'What does he want, then?'

     "'He says that you know him, and that he only wants a moment's
     conversation.'

     "'Show him round here.' An instant afterwards there appeared a little
     wizened fellow with a cringing manner and a shambling style of
     walking. He wore an open jacket, with a splotch of tar on the sleeve,
     a red-and-black check shirt, dungaree trousers, and heavy boots badly
     worn. His face was thin and brown and crafty, with a perpetual smile
     upon it, which showed an irregular line of yellow teeth, and his
     crinkled hands were half closed in a way that is distinctive of
     sailors. As he came slouching across the lawn I heard Mr. Trevor make
     a sort of hiccoughing noise in his throat, and jumping out of his
     chair, he ran into the house. He was back in a moment, and I smelt a
     strong reek of brandy as he passed me.

     "'Well, my man,' said he. 'What can I do for you?'

     "The sailor stood looking at him with puckered eyes, and with the
     same loose-lipped smile upon his face.

     "'You don't know me?' he asked.

     "'Why, dear me, it is surely Hudson,' said Mr. Trevor in a tone of
     surprise.

     "'Hudson it is, sir,' said the seaman. 'Why, it's thirty year and
     more since I saw you last. Here you are in your house, and me still
     picking my salt meat out of the harness cask.'

     "'Tut, you will find that I have not forgotten old times,' cried Mr.
     Trevor, and, walking towards the sailor, he said something in a low
     voice. 'Go into the kitchen,' he continued out loud, 'and you will
     get food and drink. I have no doubt that I shall find you a
     situation.'

     "'Thank you, sir,' said the seaman, touching his fore-lock. 'I'm just
     off a two-yearer in an eight-knot tramp, short-handed at that, and I
     wants a rest. I thought I'd get it either with Mr. Beddoes or with
     you.'

     "'Ah!' cried Trevor. 'You know where Mr. Beddoes is?'

     "'Bless you, sir, I know where all my old friends are,' said the
     fellow with a sinister smile, and he slouched off after the maid to
     the kitchen. Mr. Trevor mumbled something to us about having been
     shipmate with the man when he was going back to the diggings, and
     then, leaving us on the lawn, he went indoors. An hour later, when we
     entered the house, we found him stretched dead drunk upon the
     dining-room sofa. The whole incident left a most ugly impression upon
     my mind, and I was not sorry next day to leave Donnithorpe behind me,
     for I felt that my presence must be a source of embarrassment to my
     friend.

     "All this occurred during the first month of the long vacation. I
     went up to my London rooms, where I spent seven weeks working out a
     few experiments in organic chemistry. One day, however, when the
     autumn was far advanced and the vacation drawing to a close, I
     received a telegram from my friend imploring me to return to
     Donnithorpe, and saying that he was in great need of my advice and
     assistance. Of course I dropped everything and set out for the North
     once more.

     "He met me with the dog-cart at the station, and I saw at a glance
     that the last two months had been very trying ones for him. He had
     grown thin and careworn, and had lost the loud, cheery manner for
     which he had been remarkable.

     "'The governor is dying,' were the first words he said.

     "'Impossible!' I cried. 'What is the matter?'

     "'Apoplexy. Nervous shock, He's been on the verge all day. I doubt if
     we shall find him alive.'

     "I was, as you may think, Watson, horrified at this unexpected news.

     "'What has caused it?' I asked.

     "'Ah, that is the point. Jump in and we can talk it over while we
     drive. You remember that fellow who came upon the evening before you
     left us?'

     "'Perfectly.'

     "'Do you know who it was that we let into the house that day?'

     "'I have no idea.'

     "'It was the devil, Holmes,' he cried.

     "I stared at him in astonishment.

     "'Yes, it was the devil himself. We have not had a peaceful hour
     since--not one. The governor has never held up his head from that
     evening, and now the life has been crushed out of him and his heart
     broken, all through this accursed Hudson.'

     "'What power had he, then?'

     "'Ah, that is what I would give so much to know. The kindly,
     charitable, good old governor--how could he have fallen into the
     clutches of such a ruffian! But I am so glad that you have come,
     Holmes. I trust very much to your judgment and discretion, and I know
     that you will advise me for the best.'

     "We were dashing along the smooth white country road, with the long
     stretch of the Broads in front of us glimmering in the red light of
     the setting sun. From a grove upon our left I could already see the
     high chimneys and the flag-staff which marked the squire's dwelling.

     "'My father made the fellow gardener,' said my companion, 'and then,
     as that did not satisfy him, he was promoted to be butler. The house
     seemed to be at his mercy, and he wandered about and did what he
     chose in it. The maids complained of his drunken habits and his vile
     language. The dad raised their wages all round to recompense them for
     the annoyance. The fellow would take the boat and my father's best
     gun and treat himself to little shooting trips. And all this with
     such a sneering, leering, insolent face that I would have knocked him
     down twenty times over if he had been a man of my own age. I tell
     you, Holmes, I have had to keep a tight hold upon myself all this
     time; and now I am asking myself whether, if I had let myself go a
     little more, I might not have been a wiser man.

     "'Well, matters went from bad to worse with us, and this animal
     Hudson became more and more intrusive, until at last, on making some
     insolent reply to my father in my presence one day, I took him by the
     shoulders and turned him out of the room. He slunk away with a livid
     face and two venomous eyes which uttered more threats than his tongue
     could do. I don't know what passed between the poor dad and him after
     that, but the dad came to me next day and asked me whether I would
     mind apologizing to Hudson. I refused, as you can imagine, and asked
     my father how he could allow such a wretch to take such liberties
     with himself and his household.

     "'"Ah, my boy," said he, "it is all very well to talk, but you don't
     know how I am placed. But you shall know, Victor. I'll see that you
     shall know, come what may. You wouldn't believe harm of your poor old
     father, would you, lad?" He was very much moved, and shut himself up
     in the study all day, where I could see through the window that he
     was writing busily.

     "'That evening there came what seemed to me to be a grand release,
     for Hudson told us that he was going to leave us. He walked into the
     dining-room as we sat after dinner, and announced his intention in
     the thick voice of a half-drunken man.

     "'"I've had enough of Norfolk," said he. "I'll run down to Mr.
     Beddoes in Hampshire. He'll be as glad to see me as you were, I dare
     say."

     "'"You're not going away in any kind of spirit, Hudson, I hope," said
     my father, with a tameness which mad my blood boil.

     "'"I've not had my 'pology," said he sulkily, glancing in my
     direction.

     "'"Victor, you will acknowledge that you have used this worthy fellow
     rather roughly," said the dad, turning to me.

     "'"On the contrary, I think that we have both shown extraordinary
     patience towards him," I answered.

     "'"Oh, you do, do you?" he snarls. "Very good, mate. We'll see about
     that!"

     "'He slouched out of the room, and half an hour afterwards left the
     house, leaving my father in a state of pitiable nervousness. Night
     after night I heard him pacing his room, and it was just as he was
     recovering his confidence that the blow did at last fall.'

     "'And how?' I asked eagerly.

     "'In a most extraordinary fashion. A letter arrived for my father
     yesterday evening, bearing the Fordingbridge post-mark. My father
     read it, clapped both his hands to his head, and began running round
     the room in little circles like a man who has been driven out of his
     senses. When I at last drew him down on to the sofa, his mouth and
     eyelids were all puckered on one side, and I saw that he had a
     stroke. Dr. Fordham came over at once. We put him to bed; but the
     paralysis has spread, he has shown no sign of returning
     consciousness, and I think that we shall hardly find him alive.'

     "'You horrify me, Trevor!' I cried. 'What then could have been in
     this letter to cause so dreadful a result?'

     "'Nothing. There lies the inexplicable part of it. The message was
     absurd and trivial. Ah, my God, it is as I feared!'

     "As he spoke we came round the curve of the avenue, and saw in the
     fading light that every blind in the house had been drawn down. As we
     dashed up to the door, my friend's face convulsed with grief, a
     gentleman in black emerged from it.

     "'When did it happen, doctor?' asked Trevor.

     "'Almost immediately after you left.'

     "'Did he recover consciousness?'

     "'For an instant before the end.'

     "'Any message for me?'

     "'Only that the papers were in the back drawer of the Japanese
     cabinet.'

     "My friend ascended with the doctor to the chamber of death, while I
     remained in the study, turning the whole matter over and over in my
     head, and feeling as sombre as ever I had done in my life. What was
     the past of this Trevor, pugilist, traveler, and gold-digger, and how
     had he placed himself in the power of this acid-faced seaman?  Why,
     too, should he faint at an allusion to the half-effaced initials upon
     his arm, and die of fright when he had a letter from Fordingham? 
     Then I remembered that Fordingham was in Hampshire, and that this Mr.
     Beddoes, whom the seaman had gone to visit and presumably to
     blackmail, had also been mentioned as living in Hampshire. The
     letter, then, might either come from Hudson, the seaman, saying that
     he had betrayed the guilty secret which appeared to exist, or it
     might come from Beddoes, warning an old confederate that such a
     betrayal was imminent. So far it seemed clear enough. But then how
     could this letter be trivial and grotesque, as described by the son? 
     He must have misread it. If so, it must have been one of those
     ingenious secret codes which mean one thing while they seem to mean
     another. I must see this letter. If there were a hidden meaning in
     it, I was confident that I could pluck it forth. For an hour I sat
     pondering over it in the gloom, until at last a weeping maid brought
     in a lamp, and close at her heels came my friend Trevor, pale but
     composed, with these very papers which lie upon my knee held in his
     grasp. He sat down opposite to me, drew the lamp to the edge of the
     table, and handed me a short note scribbled, as you see, upon a
     single sheet of gray paper. 'The supply of game for London is going
     steadily up,' it ran. 'Head-keeper Hudson, we believe, has been now
     told to receive all orders for fly-paper and for preservation of your
     hen-pheasant's life.'

     "I dare say my face looked as bewildered as yours did just now when
     first I read this message. Then I reread it very carefully. It was
     evidently as I had thought, and some secret meaning must lie buried
     in this strange combination of words. Or could it be that there was a
     prearranged significance to such phrases as 'fly-paper' and
     'hen-pheasant'?  Such a meaning would be arbitrary and could not be
     deduced in any way. And yet I was loath to believe that this was the
     case, and the presence of the word Hudson seemed to show that the
     subject of the message was as I had guessed, and that it was from
     Beddoes rather than the sailor. I tried it backwards, but the
     combination 'life pheasant's hen' was not encouraging. Then I tried
     alternate words, but neither 'the of for' nor 'supply game London'
     promised to throw any light upon it.

     "And then in an instant the key of the riddle was in my hands, and I
     saw that every third word, beginning with the first, would give a
     message which might well drive old Trevor to despair.

     "It was short and terse, the warning, as I now read it to my
     companion:

     "'The game is up. Hudson has told all. Fly for your life.'

     "Victor Trevor sank his face into his shaking hands, 'It must be
     that, I suppose,' said he. "This is worse than death, for it means
     disgrace as well. But what is the meaning of these "head-keepers" and
     "hen-pheasants"?

     "'It means nothing to the message, but it might mean a good deal to
     us if we had no other means of discovering the sender. You see that
     he has begun by writing "The ... game ... is," and so on. Afterwards
     he had, to fulfill the prearranged cipher, to fill in any two words
     in each space. He would naturally use the first words which came to
     his mind, and if there were so many which referred to sport among
     them, you may be tolerably sure that he is either an ardent shot or
     interested in breeding. Do you know anything of this Beddoes?'

     "'Why, now that you mention it,' said he, 'I remember that my poor
     father used to have an invitation from him to shoot over his
     preserves every autumn.'

     "'Then it is undoubtedly from him that the note comes,' said I. 'It
     only remains for us to find out what this secret was which the sailor
     Hudson seems to have held over the heads of these two wealthy and
     respected men.'

     "'Alas, Holmes, I fear that it is one of sin and shame!' cried my
     friend. 'But from you I shall have no secrets. Here is the statement
     which was drawn up by my father when he knew that the danger from
     Hudson had become imminent. I found it in the Japanese cabinet, as he
     told the doctor. Take it and read it to me, for I have neither the
     strength nor the courage to do it myself.'

     "These are the very papers, Watson, which he handed to me, and I will
     read them to you, as I read them in the old study that night to him.
     They are endorsed outside, as you see, 'Some particulars of the
     voyage of the bark Gloria Scott, from her leaving Falmouth on the 8th
     October, 1855, to her destruction in N. Lat. 15?20', W. Long. 25?     14' on Nov. 6th.' It is in the form of a letter, and runs in this
     way:

     "'My dear, dear son, now that approaching disgrace begins to darken
     the closing years of my life, I can write with all truth and honesty
     that it is not the terror of the law, it is not the loss of my
     position in the county, nor is it my fall in the eyes of all who have
     known me, which cuts me to the heart; but it is the thought that you
     should come to blush for me--you who love me and who have seldom, I
     hope, had reason to do other than respect me. But if the blow falls
     which is forever hanging over me, then I should wish you to read
     this, that you may know straight from me how far I have been to
     blame. On the other hand, if all should go well (which may kind God
     Almighty grant!), then if by any chance this paper should be still
     undestroyed and should fall into your hands, I conjure you, by all
     you hold sacred, by the memory of your dear mother, and by the love
     which had been between us, to hurl it into the fire and to never give
     one thought to it again.

     "'If then your eye goes onto read this line, I know that I shall
     already have been exposed and dragged from my home, or as is more
     likely, for you know that my heart is weak, by lying with my tongue
     sealed forever in death. In either case the time for suppression is
     past, and every word which I tell you is the naked truth, and this I
     swear as I hope for mercy.

     "'My name, dear lad, is not Trevor. I was James Armitage in my
     younger days, and you can understand now the shock that it was to me
     a few weeks ago when your college friend addressed me in words which
     seemed to imply that he had surprised my secret. As Armitage it was
     that I entered a London banking-house, and as Armitage I was
     convicted of breaking my country's laws, and was sentenced to
     transportation. Do not think very harshly of me, laddie. It was a
     debt of honor, so called, which I had to pay, and I used money which
     was not my own to do it, in the certainty that I could replace it
     before there could be any possibility of its being missed. But the
     most dreadful ill-luck pursued me. The money which I had reckoned
     upon never came to hand, and a premature examination of accounts
     exposed my deficit. The case might have been dealt leniently with,
     but the laws were more harshly administered thirty years ago than
     now, and on my twenty-third birthday I found myself chained as a
     felon with thirty-seven other convicts in 'tween-decks of the bark
     Gloria Scott, bound for Australia.

     "'It was the year '55 when the Crimean war was at its height, and the
     old convict ships had been largely used as transports in the Black
     Sea. The government was compelled, therefore, to use smaller and less
     suitable vessels for sending out their prisoners. The Gloria Scott
     had been in the Chinese tea-trade, but she was an old-fashioned,
     heavy-bowed, broad-beamed craft, and the new clippers had cut her
     out. She was a five-hundred-ton boat; and besides her thirty-eight
     jail-birds, she carried twenty-six of a crew, eighteen soldiers, a
     captain, three mates, a doctor, a chaplain, and four warders. Nearly
     a hundred souls were in her, all told, when we set said from
     Falmouth.

     "'The partitions between the cells of the convicts, instead of being
     of thick oak, as is usual in convict-ships, were quite thin and
     frail. The man next to me, upon the aft side, was one whom I had
     particularly noticed when we were led down the quay. He was a young
     man with a clear, hairless face, a long, thin nose, and rather
     nut-cracker jaws. He carried his head very jauntily in the air, had a
     swaggering style of walking, and was, above all else, remarkable for
     his extraordinary height. I don't think any of our heads would have
     come up to his shoulder, and I am sure that he could not have
     measured less than six and a half feet. It was strange among so many
     sad and weary faces to see one which was full of energy and
     resolution. The sight of it was to me like a fire in a snow-storm. I
     was glad, then, to find that he was my neighbor, and gladder still
     when, in the dead of the night, I heard a whisper close to my ear,
     and found that he had managed to cut an opening in the board which
     separated us.

     "'"Hullo, chummy!" said he, "what's your name, and what are you here
     for?"

     "'I answered him, and asked in turn who I was talking with.

     "'"I'm Jack Prendergast," said he, "and by God! You'll learn to bless
     my name before you've done with me."

     "'I remembered hearing of his case, for it was one which had made an
     immense sensation throughout the country some time before my own
     arrest. He was a man of good family and of great ability, but on
     incurably vicious habits, who had be an ingenious system of fraud
     obtained huge sums of money from the leading London merchants.

     "'"Ha, ha! You remember my case!" said he proudly.

     "'"Very well, indeed."

     "'"Then maybe you remember something queer about it?"

     "'"What was that, then?"

     "'"I'd had nearly a quarter of a million, hadn't I?"

     "'"So it was said."

     "'"But none was recovered, eh?"

     "'"No."

     "'"Well, where d'ye suppose the balance is?" he asked.

     "'"I have no idea," said I.

     "'"Right between my finger and thumb," he cried. "By God! I've go
     more pounds to my name than you've hairs on your head. And if you've
     money, my son, and know how to handle it and spread it, you can do
     anything. Now, you don't think it likely that a man who could do
     anything is going to wear his breeches out sitting in the stinking
     hold of a rat-gutted, beetle-ridden, mouldy old coffin of a Chin
     China coaster. No, sir, such a man will look after himself and will
     look after his chums. You may lay to that! You hold on to him, and
     you may kiss the book that he'll haul you through."

     "'That was his style of talk, and at first I thought it meant
     nothing; but after a while, when he had tested me and sworn me in
     with all possible solemnity, he let me understand that there really
     was a plot to gain command of the vessel. A dozen of the prisoners
     had hatched it before they came aboard, Prendergast was the leader,
     and his money was the motive power.

     "'"I'd a partner," said he, "a rare good man, as true as a stock to a
     barrel. He's got the dibbs, he has, and where do you think he is at
     this moment?  Why, he's the chaplain of this ship--the chaplain, no
     less! He came aboard with a black coat, and his papers right, and
     money enough in his box to buy the thing right up from keel to
     main-truck. The crew are his, body and soul. He could buy 'em at so
     much a gross with a cash discount, and he did it before ever they
     signed on. He's got two of the warders and Mereer, the second mate,
     and he'd get the captain himself, if he thought him worth it."

     "'"What are we to do, then?" I asked.

     "'"What do you think?" said he. "We'll make the coats of some of
     these soldiers redder than ever the tailor did."

     "'"But they are armed," said I.

     "'"And so shall we be, my boy. There's a brace of pistols for every
     mother's son of us, and if we can't carry this ship, with the crew at
     our back, it's time we were all sent to a young misses'
     boarding-school. You speak to your mate upon the left to-night, and
     see if he is to be trusted."

     "'I did so, and found my other neighbor to be a young fellow in much
     the same position as myself, whose crime had been forgery. His name
     was Evans, but he afterwards changed it, like myself, and he is now a
     rich and prosperous man in the south of England. He was ready enough
     to join the conspiracy, as the only means of saving ourselves, and
     before we had crossed the Bay there were only two of the prisoners
     who were not in the secret. One of these was of weak mind, and we did
     not dare to trust him, and the other was suffering from jaundice, and
     could not be of any use to us.

     "'From the beginning there was really nothing to prevent us from
     taking possession of the ship. The crew were a set of ruffians,
     specially picked for the job. The sham chaplain came into our cells
     to exhort us, carrying a black bag, supposed to be full of tracts,
     and so often did he come that by the third day we had each stowed
     away at the foot of our beds a file, a brace of pistols, a pound of
     powder, and twenty slugs. Two of the warders were agents of
     Prendergast, and the second mate was his right-hand man. The captain,
     the two mates, two warders Lieutenant Martin, his eighteen soldiers,
     and the doctor were all that we had against us. Yet, safe as it was,
     we determined to neglect no precaution, and to make our attack
     suddenly by night. It came, however, more quickly than we expected,
     and in this way.

     "'One evening, about the third week after our start, the doctor had
     come down to see one of the prisoners who was ill, and putting his
     hand down on the bottom of his bunk he felt the outline of the
     pistols. If he had been silent he might have blown the whole thing,
     but he was a nervous little chap, so he gave a cry of surprise and
     turned so pale that the man knew what was up in an instant and seized
     him. He was gagged before he could give the alarm, and tied down upon
     the bed. He had unlocked the door that led to the deck, and we were
     through it in a rush. The two sentries were shot down, and so was a
     corporal who came running to see what was the matter. There were two
     more soldiers at the door of the state-room, and their muskets seemed
     not to be loaded, for they never fired upon us, and they were shot
     while trying to fix their bayonets. Then we rushed on into the
     captain's cabin, but as we pushed open the door there was an
     explosion from within, and there he lay with his brains smeared over
     the chart of the Atlantic which was pinned upon the table, while the
     chaplain stood with a smoking pistol in his hand at his elbow. The
     two mates had both been seized by the crew, and the whole business
     seemed to be settled.

     "'The state-room was next the cabin, and we flocked in there and
     flopped down on the settees, all speaking together, for we were just
     mad with the feeling that we were free once more. There were lockers
     all round, and Wilson, the sham chaplain, knocked one of them in, and
     pulled out a dozen of brown sherry. We cracked off the necks of the
     bottles, poured the stuff out into tumblers, and were just tossing
     them off, when in an instant without warning there came the roar of
     muskets in our ears, and the saloon was so full of smoke that we
     could not see across the table. When it cleared again the place was a
     shambles. Wilson and eight others were wriggling on the top of each
     other on the floor, and the blood and the brown sherry on that table
     turn me sick now when I think of it. We were so cowed by the sight
     that I think we should have given the job up if had not been for
     Prendergast. He bellowed like a bull and rushed for the door with all
     that were left alive at his heels. Out we ran, and there on the poop
     were the lieutenent and ten of his men. The swing skylights above the
     saloon table had been a bit open, and they had fired on us through
     the slit.  We got on them before they could load, and they stood to
     it like men; but we had the upper hand of them, and in five minutes
     it was all over. My God! Was there ever a slaughter-house like that
     ship! Predergast was like a raging devil, and he picked the soldiers
     up as if they had been children and threw them overboard alive or
     dead. There was one sergeant that was horribly wounded and yet kept
     on swimming for a surprising time, until some one in mercy blew out
     his brains. When the fighting was over there was no one left of our
     enemies except just the warders the mates, and the doctor.

     "'It was over them that the great quarrel arose. There were many of
     us who were glad enough to win back our freedom, and yet who had no
     wish to have murder on our souls. It was one thing to knock the
     soldiers over with their muskets in their hands, and it was another
     to stand by while men were being killed in cold blood. Eight of us,
     five convicts and three sailors, said that we would not see it done.
     But there was no moving Predergast and those who were with him. Our
     only chance of safety lay in making a clean job of it, said he, and
     he would not leave a tongue with power to wag in a witness-box. It
     nearly came to our sharing the fate of the prisoners, but at last he
     said that if we wished we might take a boat and go. We jumped at the
     offer, for we were already sick of these blookthirsty doings, and we
     saw that there would be worse before it was done. We were given a
     suit of sailor togs each, a barrel of water, two casks, one of junk
     and one of biscuits, and a compass. Prendergast threw us over a
     chart, told us that we were shipwrecked mariners whose ship had
     foundered in Lat. 15?and Long. 25?west, and then cut the painter
     and let us go.

     "'And now I come to the most surprising part of my story, my dear
     son. The seamen had hauled the fore-yard aback during the rising, but
     now as we left them they brought it square again, and as there was a
     light wind from the north and east the bark began to draw slowly away
     from us. Our boat lay, rising and falling, upon the long, smooth
     rollers, and Evans and I, who were the most educated of the party,
     were sitting in the sheets working out our position and planning what
     coast we should make for. It was a nice question, for the Cape de
     Verds were about five hundred miles to the north of us, and the
     African coast about seven hundred to the east. On the whole, as the
     wind was coming round to the north, we thought that Sierra Leone
     might be best, and turned our head in that direction, the bark being
     at that time nearly hull down on our starboard quarter. Suddenly as
     we looked at her we saw a dense black cloud of smoke shoot up from
     her, which hung like a monstrous tree upon the sky line. A few
     seconds later a roar like thunder burst upon our ears, and as the
     smoke thinned away there was no sign left of the Gloria Scott. In an
     instant we swept the boat's head round again and pulled with all our
     strength for the place where the haze still trailing over the water
     marked the scene of this catastrophe.

     "'It was a long hour before we reached it, and at first we feared
     that we had come too late to save any one. A splintered boat and a
     number of crates and fragments of spars rising and falling on the
     waves showed us where the vessel had foundered; but there was no sign
     of life, and we had turned away in despair when we heard a cry for
     help, and saw at some distance a piece of wreckage with a man lying
     stretched across it. When we pulled him aboard the boat he proved to
     be a young seaman of the name of Hudson, who was so burned and
     exhausted that he could give us no account of what had happened until
     the following morning.

     "'It seemed that after we had left, Prendergast and his gang had
     proceeded to put to death the five remaining prisoners. The two
     warders had been shot and thrown overboard, and so also had the third
     mate. Prendergast then descended into the 'tween-decks and with his
     own hands cut the throat of the unfortunate surgeon. There only
     remained the first mate, who was a bold and active man. When he saw
     the convict approaching him with the bloody knife in his hand he
     kicked off his bonds, which he had somehow contrived to loosen, and
     rushing down the deck he plunged into the after-hold. A dozen
     convicts, who descended with their pistols in search of him, found
     him with a match-box in his hand seated beside an open powder-barrel,
     which was one of a hundred carried on board, and swearing that he
     would blow all hands up if he were in any way molested. An instant
     later the explosion occurred, though Hudson thought it was caused by
     the misdirected bullet of one of the convicts rather than the mate's
     match. Be the cause what I may, it was the end of the Gloria Scott
     and of the rabble who held command of her.

     "'Such, in a few words, my dear boy, is the history of this terrible
     business in which I was involved. Next day we were picked up by the
     brig Hotspur, bound for Australia, whose captain found no difficulty
     in believing that we were the survivors of a passenger ship which had
     foundered. The transport ship Gloria Scott was set down by the
     Admiralty as being lost at sea, and no word has ever leaked out as to
     her true fate. After an excellent voyage the Hotspur landed us at
     Sydney, where Evans and I changed our names and made our way to the
     diggings, where, among the crowds who were gathered from all nations,
     we had no difficulty in losing our former identities. The rest I need
     not relate. We prospered, we traveled, we came back as rich colonials
     to England, and we bought country estates. For more than twenty years
     we have led peaceful and useful lives, and we hoped that our past was
     forever buried. Imagine, then, my feelings when in the seaman who
     came to us I recognized instantly the man who had been picked off the
     wreck. He had tracked us down somehow, and had set himself to live
     upon our fears. You will understand now how it was that I strove to
     keep the peace with him, and you will in some measure sympathize with
     me in the fears which fill me, now that he has gone from me to his
     other victim with threats upon his tongue.'

     "Underneath is written in a hand so shaky as to be hardly legible,
     'Beddoes writes in cipher to say H. has told all. Sweet Lord, have
     mercy on our souls!'

     "That was the narrative which I read that night to young Trevor, and
     I think, Watson, that under the circumstances it was a dramatic one.
     The good fellow was heart-broken at it, and went out to the Terai tea
     planting, where I hear that he is doing well. As to the sailor and
     Beddoes, neither of them was ever heard of again after that day on
     which the letter of warning was written. They both disappeared
     utterly and completely. No complaint had been lodged with he police,
     so that Beddoes had mistaken a threat for a deed. Hudson had been
     seen lurking about, and it was believed by the police that he had
     done away with Beddoes and had fled. For myself I believe that the
     truth was exactly the opposite. I think that it is most probable that
     Beddoes, pushed to desperation and believing himself to have been
     already betrayed, had revenged himself upon Hudson, and had fled from
     the country with as much money as he could lay his hands on. Those
     are the facts of the case, Doctor, and if they are of any use to your
     collection, I am sure that they are very heartily at your service."






                               THE MUSGRAVE RITUAL

     An anomaly which often struck me in the character of my friend
     Sherlock Holmes was that, although in his methods of thought he was
     the neatest and most methodical of mankind, and although also he
     affected a certain quiet primness of dress, he was none the less in
     his personal habits one of the most untidy men that ever drove a
     fellow-lodger to distraction. Not that I am in the least conventional
     in that respect myself. The rough-and-tumble work in Afghanistan,
     coming on the top of a natural Bohemianism of disposition, has made
     me rather more lax than befits a medical man. But with me there is a
     limit, and when I find a man who keeps his cigars in the
     coal-scuttle, his tobacco in the toe end of a Persian slipper, and
     his unanswered correspondence transfixed by a jack-knife into the
     very centre of his wooden mantelpiece, then I begin to give myself
     virtuous airs. I have always held, too, that pistol practice should
     be distinctly an open-air pastime; and when Holmes, in one of his
     queer humors, would sit in an arm-chair with his hair-trigger and a
     hundred Boxer cartridges, and proceed to adorn the opposite wall with
     a patriotic V. R. done in bullet-pocks, I felt strongly that neither
     the atmosphere nor the appearance of our room was improved by it.

     Our chambers were always full of chemicals and of criminal relics
     which had a way of wandering into unlikely positions, and of turning
     up in the butter-dish or in even less desirable places. But his
     papers were my great crux. He had a horror of destroying documents,
     especially those which were connected with his past cases, and yet it
     was only once in every year or two that he would muster energy to
     docket and arrange them; for, as I have mentioned somewhere in these
     incoherent memoirs, the outbursts of passionate energy when he
     performed the remarkable feats with which his name is associated were
     followed by reactions of lethargy during which he would lie about
     with his violin and his books, hardly moving save from the sofa to
     the table. Thus month after month his papers accumulated, until every
     corner of the room was stacked with bundles of manuscript which were
     on no account to be burned, and which could not be put away save by
     their owner. One winter's night, as we sat together by the fire, I
     ventured to suggest to him that, as he had finished pasting extracts
     into his common-place book, he might employ the next two hours in
     making our room a little more habitable. He could not deny the
     justice of my request, so with a rather rueful face he went off to
     his bedroom, from which he returned presently pulling a large tin box
     behind him. This he placed in the middle of the floor and, squatting
     down upon a stool in front of it, he threw back the lid. I could see
     that it was already a third full of bundles of paper tied up with red
     tape into separate packages.

     "There are cases enough here, Watson," said he, looking at me with
     mischievous eyes. "I think that if you knew all that I had in this
     box you would ask me to pull some out instead of putting others in."

     "These are the records of your early work, then?" I asked. "I have
     often wished that I had notes of those cases."

     "Yes, my boy, these were all done prematurely before my biographer
     had come to glorify me." He lifted bundle after bundle in a tender,
     caressing sort of way. "They are not all successes, Watson," said he.
     "But there are some pretty little problems among them. Here's the
     record of the Tarleton murders, and the case of Vamberry, the wine
     merchant, and the adventure of the old Russian woman, and the
     singular affair of the aluminium crutch, as well as a full account of
     Ricoletti of the club-foot, and his abominable wife. And here--ah,
     now, this really is something a little recherch?"

     He dived his arm down to the bottom of the chest, and brought up a
     small wooden box with a sliding lid, such as children's toys are kept
     in. From within he produced a crumpled piece of paper, and
     old-fashioned brass key, a peg of wood with a ball of string attached
     to it, and three rusty old disks of metal.

     "Well, my boy, what do you make of this lot?" he asked, smiling at my
     expression.

     "It is a curious collection."

     "Very curious, and the story that hangs round it will strike you as
     being more curious still."

     "These relics have a history then?"

     "So much so that they are history."

     "What do you mean by that?"

     Sherlock Holmes picked them up one by one, and laid them along the
     edge of the table. Then he reseated himself in his chair and looked
     them over with a gleam of satisfaction in his eyes.

     "These," said he, "are all that I have left to remind me of the
     adventure of the Musgrave Ritual."

     I had heard him mention the case more than once, though I had never
     been able to gather the details. "I should be so glad," said I, "if
     you would give me an account of it."

     "And leave the litter as it is?" he cried, mischievously. "Your
     tidiness won't bear much strain after all, Watson. But I should be
     glad that you should add this case to your annals, for there are
     points in it which make it quite unique in the criminal records of
     this or, I believe, of any other country. A collection of my trifling
     achievements would certainly be incomplete which contained no account
     of this very singular business.

     "You may remember how the affair of the Gloria Scott, and my
     conversation with the unhappy man whose fate I told you of, first
     turned my attention in the direction of the profession which has
     become my life's work. You see me now when my name has become known
     far and wide, and when I am generally recognized both by the public
     and by the official force as being a final court of appeal in
     doubtful cases. Even when you knew me first, at the time of the
     affair which you have commemorated in 'A Study in Scarlet,' I had
     already established a considerable, though not a very lucrative,
     connection. You can hardly realize, then, how difficult I found it at
     first, and how long I had to wait before I succeeded in making any
     headway.

     "When I first came up to London I had rooms in Montague Street, just
     round the corner from the British Museum, and there I waited, filling
     in my too abundant leisure time by studying all those branches of
     science which might make me more efficient. Now and again cases came
     in my way, principally through the introduction of old
     fellow-students, for during my last years at the University there was
     a good deal of talk there about myself and my methods. The third of
     these cases was that of the Musgrave Ritual, and it is to the
     interest which was aroused by that singular chain of events, and the
     large issues which proved to be at stake, that I trace my first
     stride towards to the position which I now hold.

     "Reginald Musgrave had been in the same college as myself, and I had
     some slight acquaintance with him. He was not generally popular among
     the undergraduates, though it always seemed to me that what was set
     down as pride was really an attempt to cover extreme natural
     diffidence. In appearance he was a man of exceedingly aristocratic
     type, thin, high-nosed, and large-eyed, with languid and yet courtly
     manners. He was indeed a scion of one of the very oldest families in
     the kingdom, though his branch was a cadet one which had separated
     from the northern Musgraves some time in the sixteenth century, and
     had established itself in western Sussex, where the Manor House of
     Hurlstone is perhaps the oldest inhabited building in the county.
     Something of his birth place seemed to cling to the man, and I never
     looked at his pale, keen face or the poise of his head without
     associating him with gray archways and mullioned windows and all the
     venerable wreckage of a feudal keep. Once or twice we drifted into
     talk, and I can remember that more than once he expressed a keen
     interest in my methods of observation and inference.

     "For four years I had seen nothing of him until one morning he walked
     into my room in Montague Street. He had changed little, was dressed
     like a young man of fashion--he was always a bit of a dandy--and
     preserved the same quiet, suave manner which had formerly
     distinguished him.

     "'How has all gone with you Musgrave?' I asked, after we had
     cordially shaken hands.

     "'You probably heard of my poor father's death,' said he; 'he was
     carried off about two years ago. Since then I have of course had the
     Hurlstone estates to manage, and as I am member for my district as
     well, my life has been a busy one. But I understand, Holmes, that you
     are turning to practical ends those powers with which you used to
     amaze us?'

     "'Yes,' said I, 'I have taken to living by my wits.'

     "'I am delighted to hear it, for your advice at present would be
     exceedingly valuable to me. We have had some very strange doings at
     Hurlstone, and the police have been able to throw no light upon the
     matter. It is really the most extraordinary and inexplicable
     business.'

     "You can imagine with what eagerness I listened to him, Watson, for
     the very chance for which I had been panting during all those months
     of inaction seemed to have come within my reach. In my inmost heart I
     believed that I could succeed where others failed, and now I had the
     opportunity to test myself.

     "'Pray, let me have the details,' I cried.

     "Reginald Musgrave sat down opposite to me, and lit the cigarette
     which I had pushed towards him.

     "'You must know,' said he, 'that though I am a bachelor, I have to
     keep up a considerable staff of servants at Hurlstone, for it is a
     rambling old place, and takes a good deal of looking after. I
     preserve, too, and in the pheasant months I usually have a
     house-party, so that it would not do to be short-handed. Altogether
     there are eight maids, the cook, the butler, two footmen, and a boy.
     The garden and the stables of course have a separate staff.

     "'Of these servants the one who had been longest in our service was
     Brunton the butler. He was a young school-master out of place when he
     was first taken up by my father, but he was a man of great energy and
     character, and he soon became quite invaluable in the household. He
     was a well-grown, handsome man, with a splendid forehead, and though
     he has been with us for twenty years he cannot be more than forty
     now. With his personal advantages and his extraordinary gifts--for he
     can speak several languages and play nearly every musical
     instrument--it is wonderful that he should have been satisfied so
     long in such a position, but I suppose that he was comfortable, and
     lacked energy to make any change. The butler of Hurlstone is always a
     thing that is remembered by all who visit us.

     "'But this paragon has one fault. He is a bit of a Don Juan, and you
     can imagine that for a man like him it is not a very difficult part
     to play in a quiet country district. When he was married it was all
     right, but since he has been a widower we have had no end of trouble
     with him. A few months ago we were in hopes that he was about to
     settle down again for he became engaged to Rachel Howells, our second
     house-maid; but he has thrown her over since then and taken up with
     Janet Tregellis, the daughter of the head game-keeper. Rachel--who is
     a very good girl, but of an excitable Welsh temperament--had a sharp
     touch of brain-fever, and goes about the house now--or did until
     yesterday--like a black-eyed shadow of her former self. That was our
     first drama at Hurlstone; but a second one came to drive it from our
     minds, and it was prefaced by the disgrace and dismissal of butler
     Brunton.

     "'This was how it came about. I have said that the man was
     intelligent, and this very intelligence has caused his ruin, for it
     seems to have led to an insatiable curiosity about things which did
     not in the least concern him. I had no idea of the lengths to which
     this would carry him, until the merest accident opened my eyes to it.

     "'I have said that the house is a rambling one. One day last week--on
     Thursday night, to be more exact--I found that I could not sleep,
     having foolishly taken a cup of strong caf?noir after my dinner.
     After struggling against it until two in the morning, I felt that it
     was quite hopeless, so I rose and lit the candle with the intention
     of continuing a novel which I was reading. The book, however, had
     been left in the billiard-room, so I pulled on my dressing-gown and
     started off to get it.

     "'In order to reach the billiard-room I had to descend a flight of
     stairs and then to cross the head of a passage which led to the
     library and the gun-room. You can imagine my surprise when, as I
     looked down this corridor, I saw a glimmer of light coming from the
     open door of the library. I had myself extinguished the lamp and
     closed the door before coming to bed. Naturally my first thought was
     of burglars. The corridors at Hurlstone have their walls largely
     decorated with trophies of old weapons. From one of these I picked a
     battle-axe, and then, leaving my candle behind me, I crept on tiptoe
     down the passage and peeped in at the open door.

     "'Brunton, the butler, was in the library. He was sitting, fully
     dressed, in an easy-chair, with a slip of paper which looked like a
     map upon his knee, and his forehead sunk forward upon his hand in
     deep thought. I stood dumb with astonishment, watching him from the
     darkness. A small taper on the edge of the table shed a feeble light
     which sufficed to show me that he was fully dressed. Suddenly, as I
     looked, he rose from his chair, and walking over to a bureau at the
     side, he unlocked it and drew out one of the drawers. From this he
     took a paper, and returning to his seat he flattened it out beside
     the taper on the edge of the table, and began to study it with minute
     attention. My indignation at this calm examination of our family
     documents overcame me so far that I took a step forward, and Brunton,
     looking up, saw me standing in the doorway. He sprang to his feet,
     his face turned livid with fear, and he thrust into his breast the
     chart-like paper which he had been originally studying.

     "'"So!" said I. "This is how you repay the trust which we have
     reposed in you. You will leave my service to-morrow."

     "'He bowed with the look of a man who is utterly crushed, and slunk
     past me without a word. The taper was still on the table, and by its
     light I glanced to see what the paper was which Brunton had taken
     from the bureau. To my surprise it was nothing of any importance at
     all, but simply a copy of the questions and answers in the singular
     old observance called the Musgrave Ritual. It is a sort of ceremony
     peculiar to our family, which each Musgrave for centuries past has
     gone through on his coming of age--a thing of private interest, and
     perhaps of some little importance to the archaeologist, like our own
     blazonings and charges, but of no practical use whatever.'

     "'We had better come back to the paper afterwards,' said I.

     "'If you think it really necessary,' he answered, with some
     hesitation. 'To continue my statement, however: I relocked the
     bureau, using the key which Brunton had left, and I had turned to go
     when I was surprised to find that the butler had returned, and was
     standing before me.

     "'"Mr. Musgrave, sir," he cried, in a voice which was hoarse with
     emotion, "I can't bear disgrace, sir. I've always been proud above my
     station in life, and disgrace would kill me. My blood will be on your
     head, sir--it will, indeed--if you drive me to despair. If you cannot
     keep me after what has passed, then for God's sake let me give you
     notice and leave in a month, as if of my own free will. I could stand
     that, Mr. Musgrave, but not to be cast out before all the folk that I
     know so well."

     "'"You don't deserve much consideration, Brunton," I answered. "Your
     conduct has been most infamous. However, as you have been a long time
     in the family, I have no wish to bring public disgrace upon you. A
     month, however is too long. Take yourself away in a week, and give
     what reason you like for going."

     "'"Only a week, sir?" he cried, in a despairing voice. "A
     fortnight--say at least a fortnight!"

     "'"A week," I repeated, "and you may consider yourself to have been
     very leniently dealt with."

     "'He crept away, his face sunk upon his breast, like a broken man,
     while I put out the light and returned to my room.

     "'For two days after this Brunton was most assiduous in his attention
     to his duties. I made no allusion to what had passed, and waited with
     some curiosity to see how he would cover his disgrace. On the third
     morning, however he did not appear, as was his custom, after
     breakfast to receive my instructions for the day. As I left the
     dining-room I happened to meet Rachel Howells, the maid. I have told
     you that she had only recently recovered from an illness, and was
     looking so wretchedly pale and wan that I remonstrated with her for
     being at work.

     "'"You should be in bed," I said. "Come back to your duties when you
     are stronger."

     "'She looked at me with so strange an expression that I began to
     suspect that her brain was affected.

     "'"I am strong enough, Mr. Musgrave," said she.

     "'"We will see what the doctor says," I answered. "You must stop work
     now, and when you go downstairs just say that I wish to see Brunton."

     "'"The butler is gone," said she.

     "'"Gone! Gone where?"

     "'"He is gone. No one has seen him. He is not in his room. Oh, yes,
     he is gone, he is gone!" She fell back against the wall with shriek
     after shriek of laughter, while I, horrified at this sudden
     hysterical attack, rushed to the bell to summon help. The girl was
     taken to her room, still screaming and sobbing, while I made
     inquiries about Brunton. There was no doubt about it that he had
     disappeared. His bed had not been slept in, he had been seen by no
     one since he had retired to his room the night before, and yet it was
     difficult to see how he could have left the house, as both windows
     and doors were found to be fastened in the morning. His clothes, his
     watch, and even his money were in his room, but the black suit which
     he usually wore was missing. His slippers, too, were gone, but his
     boots were left behind. Where then could butler Brunton have gone in
     the night, and what could have become of him now?

     "'Of course we searched the house from cellar to garret, but there
     was no trace of him. It is, as I have said, a labyrinth of an old
     house, especially the original wing, which is now practically
     uninhabited; but we ransacked every room and cellar without
     discovering the least sign of the missing man. It was incredible to
     me that he could have gone away leaving all his property behind him,
     and yet where could he be? I called in the local police, but without
     success. Rain had fallen on the night before and we examined the lawn
     and the paths all round the house, but in vain. Matters were in this
     state, when a new development quite drew our attention away from the
     original mystery.

     "'For two days Rachel Howells had been so ill, sometimes delirious,
     sometimes hysterical, that a nurse had been employed to sit up with
     her at night. On the third night after Brunton's disappearance, the
     nurse, finding her patient sleeping nicely, had dropped into a nap in
     the arm-chair, when she woke in the early morning to find the bed
     empty, the window open, and no signs of the invalid. I was instantly
     aroused, and, with the two footmen, started off at once in search of
     the missing girl. It was not difficult to tell the direction which
     she had taken, for, starting from under her window, we could follow
     her footmarks easily across the lawn to the edge of the mere, where
     they vanished close to the gravel path which leads out of the
     grounds. The lake there is eight feet deep, and you can imagine our
     feelings when we saw that the trail of the poor demented girl came to
     an end at the edge of it.

     "'Of course, we had the drags at once, and set to work to recover the
     remains, but no trace of the body could we find. On the other hand,
     we brought to the surface an object of a most unexpected kind. It was
     a linen bag which contained within it a mass of old rusted and
     discolored metal and several dull-colored pieces of pebble or glass.
     This strange find was all that we could get from the mere, and,
     although we made every possible search and inquiry yesterday, we know
     nothing of the fate either of Rachel Howells or of Richard Brunton.
     The county police are at their wits' end, and I have come up to you
     as a last resource.'

     "You can imagine, Watson, with what eagerness I listened to this
     extraordinary sequence of events, and endeavored to piece them
     together, and to devise some common thread upon which they might all
     hang. The butler was gone. The maid was gone. The maid had loved the
     butler, but had afterwards had cause to hate him. She was of Welsh
     blood, fiery and passionate. She had been terribly excited
     immediately after his disappearance. She had flung into the lake a
     bag containing some curious contents. These were all factors which
     had to be taken into consideration, and yet none of them got quite to
     the heart of the matter. What was the starting-point of this chain of
     events? There lay the end of this tangled line.

     "'I must see that paper, Musgrave,' said I, 'which this butler of
     your thought it worth his while to consult, even at the risk of the
     loss of his place.'

     "'It is rather an absurd business, this ritual of ours,' he answered.
     'But it has at least the saving grace of antiquity to excuse it. I
     have a copy of the questions and answers here if you care to run your
     eye over them.'

     "He handed me the very paper which I have here, Watson, and this is
     the strange catechism to which each Musgrave had to submit when he
     came to man's estate. I will read you the questions and answers as
     they stand.

     "'Whose was it?'

     "'His who is gone.'

     "'Who shall have it?'

     "'He who will come.'

     "'Where was the sun?'

     "'Over the oak.'

     "'Where was the shadow?'

     "'Under the elm.'

     "'How was it stepped?'

     "'North by ten and by ten, east by five and by five, south by two and
     by two, west by one and by one, and so under.'

     "'What shall we give for it?'

     "'All that is ours.'

     "'Why should we give it?'

     "'For the sake of the trust.'

     "'The original has no date, but is in the spelling of the middle of
     the seventeenth century,' remarked Musgrave. 'I am afraid, however,
     that it can be of little help to you in solving this mystery.'

     "'At least,' said I, 'it gives us another mystery, and one which is
     even more interesting than the first. It may be that the solution of
     the one may prove to be the solution of the other. You will excuse
     me, Musgrave, if I say that your butler appears to me to have been a
     very clever man, and to have had a clearer insight that ten
     generations of his masters.'

     "'I hardly follow you,' said Musgrave. 'The paper seems to me to be
     of no practical importance.'

     "'But to me it seems immensely practical, and I fancy that Brunton
     took the same view. He had probably seen it before that night on
     which you caught him.'

     "'It is very possible. We took no pains to hide it.'

     "'He simply wished, I should imagine, to refresh his memory upon that
     last occasion. He had, as I understand, some sort of map or chart
     which he was comparing with the manuscript, and which he thrust into
     his pocket when you appeared.'

     "'That is true. But what could he have to do with this old family
     custom of ours, and what does this rigmarole mean?'

     "'I don't think that we should have much difficulty in determining
     that,' said I; 'with your permission we will take the first train
     down to Sussex, and go a little more deeply into the matter upon the
     spot.'

     "The same afternoon saw us both at Hurlstone. Possibly you have seen
     pictures and read descriptions of the famous old building, so I will
     confine my account of it to saying that it is built in the shape of
     an L, the long arm being the more modern portion, and the shorter the
     ancient nucleus, from which the other had developed. Over the low,
     heavily-lintelled door, in the centre of this old part, is chiseled
     the date, 1607, but experts are agreed that the beams and stone-work
     are really much older than this. The enormously thick walls and tiny
     windows of this part had in the last century driven the family into
     building the new wing, and the old one was used now as a store-house
     and a cellar, when it was used at all. A splendid park with fine old
     timber surrounds the house, and the lake, to which my client had
     referred, lay close to the avenue, about two hundred yards from the
     building.

     "I was already firmly convinced, Watson, that there were not three
     separate mysteries here, but one only, and that if I could read the
     Musgrave Ritual aright I should hold in my hand the clue which would
     lead me to the truth concerning both the butler Brunton and the maid
     Howells. To that then I turned all my energies. Why should this
     servant be so anxious to master this old formula? Evidently because
     he saw something in it which had escaped all those generations of
     country squires, and from which he expected some personal advantage.
     What was it then, and how had it affected his fate?

     "It was perfectly obvious to me, on reading the ritual, that the
     measurements must refer to some spot to which the rest of the
     document alluded, and that if we could find that spot, we should be
     in a fair way towards finding what the secret was which the old
     Musgraves had thought it necessary to embalm in so curious a fashion.
     There were two guides given us to start with, an oak and an elm. As
     to the oak there could be no question at all. Right in front of the
     house, upon the left-hand side of the drive, there stood a patriarch
     among oaks, one of the most magnificent trees that I have ever seen.

     "'That was there when your ritual was drawn up,' said I, as we drove
     past it.

     "'It was there at the Norman Conquest in all probability,' he
     answered. 'It has a girth of twenty-three feet.'

     "Here was one of my fixed points secured.

     "'Have you any old elms?' I asked.

     "'There used to be a very old one over yonder but it was struck by
     lightning ten years ago, and we cut down the stump,'

     "'You can see where it used to be?'

     "'Oh, yes.'

     "'There are no other elms?'

     "'No old ones, but plenty of beeches.'

     "'I should like to see where it grew.'

     "We had driven up in a dogcart, and my client led me away at once,
     without our entering the house, to the scar on the lawn where the elm
     had stood. It was nearly midway between the oak and the house. My
     investigation seemed to be progressing.

     "'I suppose it is impossible to find out how high the elm was?' I
     asked.

     "'I can give you it at once. It was sixty-four feet.'

     "'How do you come to know it?' I asked, in surprise.

     "'When my old tutor used to give me an exercise in trigonometry, it
     always took the shape of measuring heights. When I was a lad I worked
     out every tree and building in the estate.'

     "This was an unexpected piece of luck. My data were coming more
     quickly than I could have reasonably hoped.

     "'Tell me,' I asked, 'did your butler ever ask you such a question?'

     "Reginald Musgrave looked at me in astonishment. 'Now that you call
     it to my mind,' he answered, 'Brunton did ask me about the height of
     the tree some months ago, in connection with some little argument
     with the groom.'

     "This was excellent news, Watson, for it showed me that I was on the
     right road. I looked up at the sun. It was low in the heavens, and I
     calculated that in less than an hour it would lie just above the
     topmost branches of the old oak. One condition mentioned in the
     Ritual would then be fulfilled. And the shadow of the elm must mean
     the farther end of the shadow, otherwise the trunk would have been
     chosen as the guide. I had, then, to find where the far end of the
     shadow would fall when the sun was just clear of the oak."

     "That must have been difficult, Holmes, when the elm was no longer
     there."

     "Well, at least I knew that if Brunton could do it, I could also.
     Besides, there was no real difficulty. I went with Musgrave to his
     study and whittled myself this peg, to which I tied this long string
     with a knot at each yard. Then I took two lengths of a fishing-rod,
     which came to just six feet, and I went back with my client to where
     the elm had been. The sun was just grazing the top of the oak. I
     fastened the rod on end, marked out the direction of the shadow, and
     measured it. It was nine feet in length.

     "Of course the calculation now was a simple one. If a rod of six feet
     threw a shadow of nine, a tree of sixty-four feet would throw one of
     ninety-six, and the line of the one would of course the line of the
     other. I measured out the distance, which brought me almost to the
     wall of the house, and I thrust a peg into the spot. You can imagine
     my exultation, Watson, when within two inches of my peg I saw a
     conical depression in the ground. I knew that it was the mark made by
     Brunton in his measurements, and that I was still upon his trail.

     "From this starting-point I proceeded to step, having first taken the
     cardinal points by my pocket-compass. Ten steps with each foot took
     me along parallel with the wall of the house, and again I marked my
     spot with a peg. Then I carefully paced off five to the east and two
     to the south. It brought me to the very threshold of the old door.
     Two steps to the west meant now that I was to go two paces down the
     stone-flagged passage, and this was the place indicated by the
     Ritual.

     "Never have I felt such a cold chill of disappointment, Watson. For a
     moment is seemed to me that there must be some radical mistake in my
     calculations. The setting sun shone full upon the passage floor, and
     I could see that the old, foot-worn gray stones with which it was
     paved were firmly cemented together, and had certainly not been moved
     for many a long year. Brunton had not been at work here. I tapped
     upon the floor, but it sounded the same all over, and there was no
     sign of any crack or crevice. But, Fortunately, Musgrave, who had
     begun to appreciate the meaning of my proceedings, and who was now as
     excited as myself, took out his manuscript to check my calculation.

     "'And under,' he cried. 'You have omitted the "and under."'

     "I had thought that it meant that we were to dig, but now, of course,
     I saw at once that I was wrong. 'There is a cellar under this then?'
     I cried.

     "'Yes, and as old as the house. Down here, through this door.'

     "We went down a winding stone stair, and my companion, striking a
     match, lit a large lantern which stood on a barrel in the corner. In
     an instant it was obvious that we had at last come upon the true
     place, and that we had not been the only people to visit the spot
     recently.

     "It had been used for the storage of wood, but the billets, which had
     evidently been littered over the floor, were now piled at the sides,
     so as to leave a clear space in the middle. In this space lay a large
     and heavy flagstone with a rusted iron ring in the centre to which a
     thick shepherd's-check muffler was attached.

     "'By Jove!' cried my client. 'That's Brunton's muffler. I have seen
     it on him, and could swear to it. What has the villain been doing
     here?'

     "At my suggestion a couple of the county police were summoned to be
     present, and I then endeavored to raise the stone by pulling on the
     cravat. I could only move it slightly, and it was with the aid of one
     of the constables that I succeeded at last in carrying it to one
     side. A black hole yawned beneath into which we all peered, while
     Musgrave, kneeling at the side, pushed down the lantern.

     "A small chamber about seven feet deep and four feet square lay open
     to us. At one side of this was a squat, brass-bound wooden box, the
     lid of which was hinged upwards, with this curious old-fashioned key
     projecting from the lock. It was furred outside by a thick layer of
     dust, and damp and worms had eaten through the wood, so that a crop
     of livid fungi was growing on the inside of it. Several discs of
     metal, old coins apparently, such as I hold here, were scattered over
     the bottom of the box, but it contained nothing else.

     "At the moment, however, we had no thought for the old chest, for our
     eyes were riveted upon that which crouched beside it. It was the
     figure of a man, clad in a suit of black, who squatted down upon his
     hams with his forehead sunk upon the edge of the box and his two arms
     thrown out on each side of it. The attitude had drawn all the
     stagnant blood to the face, and no man could have recognized that
     distorted liver-colored countenance; but his height, his dress, and
     his hair were all sufficient to show my client, when we had drawn the
     body up, that it was indeed his missing butler. He had been dead some
     days, but there was no wound or bruise upon his person to show how he
     had met his dreadful end. When his body had been carried from the
     cellar we found ourselves still confronted with a problem which was
     almost as formidable as that with which we had started.

     "I confess that so far, Watson, I had been disappointed in my
     investigation. I had reckoned upon solving the matter when once I had
     found the place referred to in the Ritual; but now I was there, and
     was apparently as far as ever from knowing what it was which the
     family had concealed with such elaborate precautions. It is true that
     I had thrown a light upon the fate of Brunton, but now I had to
     ascertain how that fate had come upon him, and what part had been
     played in the matter by the woman who had disappeared. I sat down
     upon a keg in the corner and thought the whole matter carefully over.

     "You know my methods in such cases, Watson. I put myself in the man's
     place and, having first gauged his intelligence, I try to imagine how
     I should myself have proceeded under the same circumstances. In this
     case the matter was simplified by Brunton's intelligence being quite
     first-rate, so that it was unnecessary to make any allowance for the
     personal equation, as the astronomers have dubbed it. He knew that
     something valuable was concealed. He had spotted the place. He found
     that the stone which covered it was just too heavy for a man to move
     unaided. What would he do next? He could not get help from outside,
     even if he had some one whom he could trust, without the unbarring of
     doors and considerable risk of detection. It was better, if he could,
     to have his helpmate inside the house. But whom could he ask? This
     girl had been devoted to him. A man always finds it hard to realize
     that he may have finally lost a woman's love, however badly he may
     have treated her. He would try by a few attentions to make his peace
     with the girl Howells, and then would engage her as his accomplice.
     Together they would come at night to the cellar, and their united
     force would suffice to raise the stone. So far I could follow their
     actions as if I had actually seen them.

     "But for two of them, and one a woman, it must have been heavy work
     the raising of that stone. A burly Sussex policeman and I had found
     it no light job. What would they do to assist them? Probably what I
     should have done myself. I rose and examined carefully the different
     billets of wood which were scattered round the floor. Almost at once
     I came upon what I expected. One piece, about three feet in length,
     had a very marked indentation at one end, while several were
     flattened at the sides as if they had been compressed by some
     considerable weight. Evidently, as they had dragged the stone up they
     had thrust the chunks of wood into the chink, until at last, when the
     opening was large enough to crawl through, they would hold it open by
     a billet placed lengthwise, which might very well become indented at
     the lower end, since the whole weight of the stone would press it
     down on to the edge of this other slab. So far I was still on safe
     ground.

     "And now how was I to proceed to reconstruct this midnight drama?
     Clearly, only one could fit into the hole, and that one was Brunton.
     The girl must have waited above. Brunton then unlocked the box,
     handed up the contents presumably--since they were not to be
     found--and then--and then what happened?

     "What smouldering fire of vengeance had suddenly sprung into flame in
     this passionate Celtic woman's soul when she saw the man who had
     wronged her--wronged her, perhaps, far more than we suspected--in her
     power? Was it a chance that the wood had slipped, and that the stone
     had shut Brunton into what had become his sepulchre? Had she only
     been guilty of silence as to his fate? Or had some sudden blow from
     her hand dashed the support away and sent the slab crashing down into
     its place? Be that as it might, I seemed to see that woman's figure
     still clutching at her treasure trove and flying wildly up the
     winding stair, with her ears ringing perhaps with the muffled screams
     from behind her and with the drumming of frenzied hands against the
     slab of stone which was choking her faithless lover's life out.

     "Here was the secret of her blanched face, her shaken nerves, her
     peals of hysterical laughter on the next morning. But what had been
     in the box? What had she done with that? Of course, it must have been
     the old metal and pebbles which my client had dragged from the mere.
     She had thrown them in there at the first opportunity to remove the
     last trace of her crime.

     "For twenty minutes I had sat motionless, thinking the matter out.
     Musgrave still stood with a very pale face, swinging his lantern and
     peering down into the hole.

     "'These are coins of Charles the First,' said he, holding out the few
     which had been in the box; 'you see we were right in fixing our date
     for the Ritual.'

     "'We may find something else of Charles the First,' I cried, as the
     probable meaning of the first two question of the Ritual broke
     suddenly upon me. 'Let me see the contents of the bag which you
     fished from the mere.'

     "We ascended to his study, and he laid the debris before me. I could
     understand his regarding it as of small importance when I looked at
     it, for the metal was almost black and the stones lustreless and
     dull. I rubbed one of them on my sleeve, however, and it glowed
     afterwards like a spark in the dark hollow of my hand. The metal work
     was in the form of a double ring, but it had been bent and twisted
     out of its original shape.

     "'You must bear in mind,' said I, 'that the royal party made head in
     England even after the death of the king, and that when they at last
     fled they probably left many of their most precious possessions
     buried behind them, with the intention of returning for them in more
     peaceful times.'

     "'My ancestor, Sir Ralph Musgrave, was a prominent Cavalier and the
     right-hand man of Charles the Second in his wanderings,' said my
     friend.

     "'Ah, indeed!' I answered. 'Well now, I think that really should give
     us the last link that we wanted. I must congratulate you on coming
     into the possession, though in rather a tragic manner of a relic
     which is of great intrinsic value, but of even greater importance as
     an historical curiosity.'

     "'What is it, then?' he gasped in astonishment.

     "'It is nothing less than the ancient crown of the kings of England.'

     "'The crown!'

     "'Precisely. Consider what the Ritual says: How does it run? "Whose
     was it?" "His who is gone." That was after the execution of Charles.
     Then, "Who shall have it?" "He who will come." That was Charles the
     Second, whose advent was already foreseen. There can, I think, be no
     doubt that this battered and shapeless diadem once encircled the
     brows of the royal Stuarts.'

     "'And how came it in the pond?'

     "'Ah, that is a question that will take some time to answer.' And
     with that I sketched out to him the whole long chain of surmise and
     of proof which I had constructed. The twilight had closed in and the
     moon was shining brightly in the sky before my narrative was
     finished.

     "'And how was it then that Charles did not get his crown when he
     returned?' asked Musgrave, pushing back the relic into its linen bag.

     "'Ah, there you lay your finger upon the one point which we shall
     probably never be able to clear up. It is likely that the Musgrave
     who held the secret died in the interval, and by some oversight left
     this guide to his descendant without explaining the meaning of it.
     From that day to this it has been handed down from father to son,
     until at last it came within reach of a man who tore its secret out
     of it and lost his life in the venture.'

     "And that's the story of the Musgrave Ritual, Watson. They have the
     crown down at Hurlstone--though they had some legal bother and a
     considerable sum to pay before they were allowed to retain it. I am
     sure that if you mentioned my name they would be happy to show it to
     you. Of the woman nothing was ever heard, and the probability is that
     she got away out of England and carried herself and the memory of her
     crime to some land beyond the seas."






                               THE REIGATE PUZZLE

     It was some time before the health of my friend Mr. Sherlock Holmes
     recovered from the strain caused by his immense exertions in the
     spring of '87.  The whole question of the Netherland-Sumatra Company
     and of the colossal schemes of Baron Maupertuis are too recent in the
     minds of the public, and are too intimately concerned with politics
     and finance to be fitting subjects for this series of sketches.  They
     led, however, in an indirect fashion to a singular and complex
     problem which gave my friend an opportunity of demonstrating the
     value of a fresh weapon among the many with which he waged his
     life-long battle against crime.

     On referring to my notes I see that it was upon the 14th of April
     that I received a telegram from Lyons which informed me that Holmes
     was lying ill in the Hotel Dulong.  Within twenty-four hours I was in
     his sick-room, and was relieved to find that there was nothing
     formidable in his symptoms.  Even his iron constitution, however, had
     broken down under the strain of an investigation which had extended
     over two months, during which period he had never worked less than
     fifteen hours a day, and had more than once, as he assured me, kept
     to his task for five days at a stretch.  Even the triumphant issue of
     his labors could not save him from reaction after so terrible an
     exertion, and at a time when Europe was ringing with his name and
     when his room was literally ankle-deep with congratulatory telegrams
     I found him a prey to the blackest depression.  Even the knowledge
     that he had succeeded where the police of three countries had failed,
     and that he had outmanoeuvred at every point the most accomplished
     swindler in Europe, was insufficient to rouse him from his nervous
     prostration.

     Three days later we were back in Baker Street together; but it was
     evident that my friend would be much the better for a change, and the
     thought of a week of spring time in the country was full of
     attractions to me also.  My old friend, Colonel Hayter, who had come
     under my professional care in Afghanistan, had now taken a house near
     Reigate in Surrey, and had frequently asked me to come down to him
     upon a visit.  On the last occasion he had remarked that if my friend
     would only come with me he would be glad to extend his hospitality to
     him also.  A little diplomacy was needed, but when Holmes understood
     that the establishment was a bachelor one, and that he would be
     allowed the fullest freedom, he fell in with my plans and a week
     after our return from Lyons we were under the Colonel's roof.  Hayter
     was a fine old soldier who had seen much of the world, and he soon
     found, as I had expected, that Holmes and he had much in common.

     On the evening of our arrival we were sitting in the Colonel's
     gun-room after dinner, Holmes stretched upon the sofa, while Hayter
     and I looked over his little armory of Eastern weapons.

     "By the way," said he suddenly, "I think I'll take one of these
     pistols upstairs with me in case we have an alarm."

     "An alarm!" said I.

     "Yes, we've had a scare in this part lately.  Old Acton, who is one
     of our county magnates, had his house broken into last Monday.  No
     great damage done, but the fellows are still at large."

     "No clue?" asked Holmes, cocking his eye at the Colonel.

     "None as yet.  But the affair is a pretty one, one of our little
     country crimes, which must seem too small for your attention, Mr.
     Holmes, after this great international affair."

     Holmes waved away the compliment, though his smile showed that it had
     pleased him.

     "Was there any feature of interest?"

     "I fancy not.  The thieves ransacked the library and got very little
     for their pains.  The whole place was turned upside down, drawers
     burst open, and presses ransacked, with the result that an odd volume
     of Pope's Homer, two plated candlesticks, an ivory letter-weight, a
     small oak barometer, and a ball of twine are all that have vanished."

     "What an extraordinary assortment!" I exclaimed.

     "Oh, the fellows evidently grabbed hold of everything they could
     get."

     Holmes grunted from the sofa.

     "The county police ought to make something of that," said he; "why,
     it is surely obvious that--"

     But I held up a warning finger.

     "You are here for a rest, my dear fellow.  For Heaven's sake don't
     get started on a new problem when your nerves are all in shreds."

     Holmes shrugged his shoulders with a glance of comic resignation
     towards the Colonel, and the talk drifted away into less dangerous
     channels.

     It was destined, however, that all my professional caution should be
     wasted, for next morning the problem obtruded itself upon us in such
     a way that it was impossible to ignore it, and our country visit took
     a turn which neither of us could have anticipated.  We were at
     breakfast when the Colonel's butler rushed in with all his propriety
     shaken out of him.

     "Have you heard the news, sir?" he gasped.  "At the Cunningham's
     sir!"

     "Burglary!" cried the Colonel, with his coffee-cup in mid-air.

     "Murder!"

     The Colonel whistled.  "By Jove!" said he.  "Who's killed, then? The
     J.P. or his son?"

     "Neither, sir.  It was William the coachman.  Shot through the heart,
     sir, and never spoke again."

     "Who shot him, then?"

     "The burglar, sir.  He was off like a shot and got clean away.  He'd
     just broke in at the pantry window when William came on him and met
     his end in saving his master's property."

     "What time?"

     "It was last night, sir, somewhere about twelve."

     "Ah, then, we'll step over afterwards," said the Colonel, coolly
     settling down to his breakfast again.  "It's a baddish business," he
     added when the butler had gone; "he's our leading man about here, is
     old Cunningham, and a very decent fellow too.  He'll be cut up over
     this, for the man has been in his service for years and was a good
     servant.  It's evidently the same villains who broke into Acton's."

     "And stole that very singular collection," said Holmes, thoughtfully.

     "Precisely."

     "Hum!  It may prove the simplest matter in the world, but all the
     same at first glance this is just a little curious, is it not?  A
     gang of burglars acting in the country might be expected to vary the
     scene of their operations, and not to crack two cribs in the same
     district within a few days.  When you spoke last night of taking
     precautions I remember that it passed through my mind that this was
     probably the last parish in England to which the thief or thieves
     would be likely to turn their attention--which shows that I have
     still much to learn."

     "I fancy it's some local practitioner," said the Colonel.  "In that
     case, of course, Acton's and Cunningham's are just the places he
     would go for, since they are far the largest about here."

     "And richest?"

     "Well, they ought to be, but they've had a lawsuit for some years
     which has sucked the blood out of both of them, I fancy.  Old Acton
     has some claim on half Cunningham's estate, and the lawyers have been
     at it with both hands."

     "If it's a local villain there should not be much difficulty in
     running him down," said Holmes with a yawn.  "All right, Watson, I
     don't intend to meddle."

     "Inspector Forrester, sir," said the butler, throwing open the door.

     The official, a smart, keen-faced young fellow, stepped into the
     room.  "Good-morning, Colonel," said he; "I hope I don't intrude, but
     we hear that Mr. Holmes of Baker Street is here."

     The Colonel waved his hand towards my friend, and the Inspector
     bowed.

     "We thought that perhaps you would care to step across, Mr. Holmes."

     "The fates are against you, Watson," said he, laughing.  "We were
     chatting about the matter when you came in, Inspector.  Perhaps you
     can let us have a few details."  As he leaned back in his chair in
     the familiar attitude I knew that the case was hopeless.

     "We had no clue in the Acton affair.  But here we have plenty to go
     on, and there's no doubt it is the same party in each case.  The man
     was seen."

     "Ah!"

     "Yes, sir.  But he was off like a deer after the shot that killed
     poor William Kirwan was fired. Mr. Cunningham saw him from the
     bedroom window, and Mr. Alec Cunningham saw him from the back
     passage.  It was quarter to twelve when the alarm broke out.  Mr.
     Cunningham had just got into bed, and Mr. Alec was smoking a pipe in
     his dressing-gown.  They both heard William the coachman calling for
     help, and Mr. Alec ran down to see what was the matter.  The back
     door was open, and as he came to the foot of the stairs he saw two
     men wrestling together outside.  One of them fired a shot, the other
     dropped, and the murderer rushed across the garden and over the
     hedge.  Mr. Cunningham, looking out of his bedroom, saw the fellow as
     he gained the road, but lost sight of him at once.  Mr. Alec stopped
     to see if he could help the dying man, and so the villain got clean
     away.  Beyond the fact that he was a middle-sized man and dressed in
     some dark stuff, we have no personal clue; but we are making
     energetic inquiries, and if he is a stranger we shall soon find him
     out."

     "What was this William doing there?  Did he say anything before he
     died?"

     "Not a word.  He lives at the lodge with his mother, and as he was a
     very faithful fellow we imagine that he walked up to the house with
     the intention of seeing that all was right there.  Of course this
     Acton business has put every one on their guard.  The robber must
     have just burst open the door--the lock has been forced--when William
     came upon him."

     "Did William say anything to his mother before going out?"

     "She is very old and deaf, and we can get no information from her. 
     The shock has made her half-witted, but I understand that she was
     never very bright.  There is one very important circumstance,
     however.  Look at this!"

     He took a small piece of torn paper from a note-book and spread it
     out upon his knee.

     "This was found between the finger and thumb of the dead man.  It
     appears to be a fragment torn from a larger sheet.  You will observe
     that the hour mentioned upon it is the very time at which the poor
     fellow met his fate.  You see that his murderer might have torn the
     rest of the sheet from him or he might have taken this fragment from
     the murderer.  It reads almost as though it were an appointment."

     Holmes took up the scrap of paper, a facsimile of which is here
     reproduced.

     at quarter to twelve
     learn what
     may

     "Presuming that it is an appointment," continued the Inspector, "it
     is of course a conceivable theory that this William Kirwan--though he
     had the reputation of being an honest man, may have been in league
     with the thief.  He may have met him there, may even have helped him
     to break in the door, and then they may have fallen out between
     themselves."

     "This writing is of extraordinary interest," said Holmes, who had
     been examining it with intense concentration.  "These are much deeper
     waters than I had thought."  He sank his head upon his hands, while
     the Inspector smiled at the effect which his case had had upon the
     famous London specialist.

     "Your last remark," said Holmes, presently, "as to the possibility of
     there being an understanding between the burglar and the servant, and
     this being a note of appointment from one to the other, is an
     ingenious and not entirely impossible supposition.  But this writing
     opens up--" He sank his head into his hands again and remained for
     some minutes in the deepest thought.  When he raised his face again,
     I was surprised to see that his cheek was tinged with color, and his
     eyes as bright as before his illness.  He sprang to his feet with all
     his old energy.

     "I'll tell you what," said he, "I should like to have a quiet little
     glance into the details of this case.  There is something in it which
     fascinates me extremely.  If you will permit me, Colonel, I will
     leave my friend Watson and you, and I will step round with the
     Inspector to test the truth of one or two little fancies of mine.  I
     will be with you again in half an hour."

     An hour and half had elapsed before the Inspector returned alone.

     "Mr. Holmes is walking up and down in the field outside," said he. 
     "He wants us all four to go up to the house together."

     "To Mr. Cunningham's?"

     "Yes, sir."

     "What for?"

     The Inspector shrugged his shoulders.  "I don't quite know, sir. 
     Between ourselves, I think Mr. Holmes had not quite got over his
     illness yet.  He's been behaving very queerly, and he is very much
     excited."

     "I don't think you need alarm yourself," said I.  "I have usually
     found that there was method in his madness."

     "Some folks might say there was madness in his method," muttered the
     Inspector.  "But he's all on fire to start, Colonel, so we had best
     go out if you are ready."

     We found Holmes pacing up and down in the field, his chin sunk upon
     his breast, and his hands thrust into his trousers pockets.

     "The matter grows in interest," said he.  "Watson, your country-trip
     has been a distinct success.  I have had a charming morning."

     "You have been up to the scene of the crime, I understand," said the
     Colonel.

     "Yes; the Inspector and I have made quite a little reconnaissance
     together."

     "Any success?"

     "Well, we have seen some very interesting things.  I'll tell you what
     we did as we walk.  First of all, we saw the body of this unfortunate
     man.  He certainly died from a revolver wound as reported."

     "Had you doubted it, then?"

     "Oh, it is as well to test everything.  Our inspection was not
     wasted.  We then had an interview with Mr. Cunningham and his son,
     who were able to point out the exact spot where the murderer had
     broken through the garden-hedge in his flight.  That was of great
     interest."

     "Naturally."

     "Then we had a look at this poor fellow's mother.  We could get no
     information from her, however, as she is very old and feeble."

     "And what is the result of your investigations?"

     "The conviction that the crime is a very peculiar one.  Perhaps our
     visit now may do something to make it less obscure.  I think that we
     are both agreed, Inspector that the fragment of paper in the dead
     man's hand, bearing, as it does, the very hour of his death written
     upon it, is of extreme importance."

     "It should give a clue, Mr. Holmes."

     "It does give a clue.  Whoever wrote that note was the man who
     brought William Kirwan out of his bed at that hour.  But where is the
     rest of that sheet of paper?"

     "I examined the ground carefully in the hope of finding it," said the
     Inspector.

     "It was torn out of the dead man's hand.  Why was some one so anxious
     to get possession of it?  Because it incriminated him.  And what
     would he do with it?  Thrust it into his pocket, most likely, never
     noticing that a corner of it had been left in the grip of the corpse.
      If we could get the rest of that sheet it is obvious that we should
     have gone a long way towards solving the mystery."

     "Yes, but how can we get at the criminal's pocket before we catch the
     criminal?"

     "Well, well, it was worth thinking over.  Then there is another
     obvious point.  The note was sent to William.  The man who wrote it
     could not have taken it; otherwise, of course, he might have
     delivered his own message by word of mouth.  Who brought the note,
     then?  Or did it come through the post?"

     "I have made inquiries," said the Inspector.  "William received a
     letter by the afternoon post yesterday.  The envelope was destroyed
     by him."

     "Excellent!" cried Holmes, clapping the Inspector on the back. 
     "You've seen the postman.  It is a pleasure to work with you.  Well,
     here is the lodge, and if you will come up, Colonel, I will show you
     the scene of the crime."

     We passed the pretty cottage where the murdered man had lived, and
     walked up an oak-lined avenue to the fine old Queen Anne house, which
     bears the date of Malplaquet upon the lintel of the door.  Holmes and
     the Inspector led us round it until we came to the side gate, which
     is separated by a stretch of garden from the hedge which lines the
     road.  A constable was standing at the kitchen door.

     "Throw the door open, officer," said Holmes.  "Now, it was on those
     stairs that young Mr. Cunningham stood and saw the two men struggling
     just where we are.  Old Mr. Cunningham was at that window--the second
     on the left--and he saw the fellow get away just to the left of that
     bush. So did the son.They are both sure of it on account of the bush.
     Then Mr. Alec ran out and knelt beside the wounded man. The ground is
     very hard, you see, and there are no marks to guide us." As he spoke
     two men came down the garden path, from round the angle of the house.
     The one was an elderly man, with a strong, deep-lined, heavy-eyed
     face; the other a dashing young fellow, whose bright, smiling
     expression and showy dress were in strange contract with the business
     which had brought us there.

     "Still at it, then?" said he to Holmes. "I thought you Londoners were
     never at fault. You don't seem to be so very quick, after all."

     "Ah, you must give us a little time," said Holmes good-humoredly.

     "You'll want it," said young Alec Cunningham. "Why, I don't see that
     we have any clue at all."

     "There's only one," answered the Inspector. "We thought that if we
     could only find--Good heavens, Mr. Holmes! What is the matter?"

     My poor friend's face had suddenly assumed the most dreadful
     expression. His eyes rolled upwards, his features writhed in agony,
     and with a suppressed groan he dropped on his face upon the ground.
     Horrified at the suddenness and severity of the attack, we carried
     him into the kitchen, where he lay back in a large chair, and
     breathed heavily for some minutes. Finally, with a shamefaced apology
     for his weakness, he rose once more.

     "Watson would tell you that I have only just recovered from a severe
     illness," he explained. "I am liable to these sudden nervous
     attacks."

     "Shall I send you home in my trap?" asked old Cunningham.

     "Well, since I am here, there is one point on which I should like to
     feel sure. We can very easily verify it."

     "What was it?"

     "Well, it seems to me that it is just possible that the arrival of
     this poor fellow William was not before, but after, the entrance of
     the burglary into the house. You appear to take it for granted that,
     although the door was forced, the robber never got in."

     "I fancy that is quite obvious," said Mr. Cunningham, gravely. "Why,
     my son Alec had not yet gone to bed, and he would certainly have
     heard any one moving about."

     "Where was he sitting?"

     "I was smoking in my dressing-room."

     "Which window is that?"

     "The last on the left next my father's."

     "Both of your lamps were lit, of course?"

     "Undoubtedly."

     "There are some very singular points here," said Holmes, smiling. "Is
     it not extraordinary that a burglary--and a burglar who had had some
     previous experience--should deliberately break into a house at a time
     when he could see from the lights that two of the family were still
     afoot?"

     "He must have been a cool hand."

     "Well, of course, if the case were not an odd one we should not have
     been driven to ask you for an explanation," said young Mr. Alec. "But
     as to your ideas that the man had robbed the house before William
     tackled him, I think it a most absurd notion. Wouldn't we have found
     the place disarranged, and missed the things which he had taken?"

     "It depends on what the things were," said Holmes. "You must remember
     that we are dealing with a burglar who is a very peculiar fellow, and
     who appears to work on lines of his own. Look, for example, at the
     queer lot of things which he took from Acton's--what was it?--a ball
     of string, a letter-weight, and I don't know what other odds and
     ends."

     "Well, we are quite in your hands, Mr. Holmes," said old Cunningham.
     "Anything which you or the Inspector may suggest will most certainly
     be done."

     "In the first place," said Holmes, "I should like you to offer a
     reward--coming from yourself, for the officials may take a little
     time before they would agree upon the sum, and these things cannot be
     done too promptly. I have jotted down the form here, if you would not
     mind signing it. Fifty pound was quite enough, I thought."

     "I would willingly give five hundred," said the J.P., taking the slip
     of paper and the pencil which Holmes handed to him. "This is not
     quite correct, however," he added, glancing over the document.

     "I wrote it rather hurriedly."

     "You see you begin, 'Whereas, at about a quarter to one on Tuesday
     morning an attempt was made,' and so on. It was at a quarter to
     twelve, as a matter of fact."

     I was pained at the mistake, for I knew how keenly Holmes would feel
     any slip of the kind. It was his specialty to be accurate as to fact,
     but his recent illness had shaken him, and this one little incident
     was enough to show me that he was still far from being himself. He
     was obviously embarrassed for an instant, while the Inspector raised
     his eyebrows, and Alec Cunningham burst into a laugh. The old
     gentleman corrected the mistake, however, and handed the paper back
     to Holmes.

     "Get it printed as soon as possible," he said; "I think your idea is
     an excellent one."

     Holmes put the slip of paper carefully away into his pocket-book.

     "And now," said he, "it really would be a good thing that we should
     all go over the house together and make certain that this rather
     erratic burglar did not, after all, carry anything away with him."

     Before entering, Holmes made an examination of the door which had
     been forced. It was evident that a chisel or strong knife had been
     thrust in, and the lock forced back with it. We could see the marks
     in the wood where it had been pushed in.

     "You don't use bars, then?" he asked.

     "We have never found it necessary."

     "You don't keep a dog?"

     "Yes, but he is chained on the other side of the house."

     "When do the servants go to bed?"

     "About ten."

     "I understand that William was usually in bed also at that hour."

     "Yes."

     "It is singular that on this particular night he should have been up.
     Now, I should be very glad if you would have the kindness to show us
     over the house, Mr. Cunningham."

     A stone-flagged passage, with the kitchens branching away from it,
     led by a wooden staircase directly to the first floor of the house.
     It came out upon the landing opposite to a second more ornamental
     stair which came up from the front hall. Out of this landing opened
     the drawing-room and several bedrooms, including those of Mr.
     Cunningham and his son. Holmes walked slowly, taking keen note of the
     architecture of the house. I could tell from his expression that he
     was on a hot scent, and yet I could not in the least imagine in what
     direction his inferences were leading him.

     "My good sir," said Mr. Cunningham with some impatience, "this is
     surely very unnecessary. That is my room at the end of the stairs,
     and my son's is the one beyond it. I leave it to your judgment
     whether it was possible for the thief to have come up here without
     disturbing us."

     "You must try round and get on a fresh scent, I fancy," said the son
     with a rather malicious smile.

     "Still, I must ask you to humor me a little further. I should like,
     for example, to see how far the windows of the bedrooms command the
     front. This, I understand is your son's room"--he pushed open the
     door--"and that, I presume, is the dressing-room in which he sat
     smoking when the alarm was given. Where does the window of that look
     out to?" He stepped across the bedroom, pushed open the door, and
     glanced round the other chamber.

     "I hope that you are satisfied now?" said Mr. Cunningham, tartly.

     "Thank you, I think I have seen all that I wished."

     "Then if it is really necessary we can go into my room."

     "If it is not too much trouble."

     The J.P. shrugged his shoulders, and led the way into his own
     chamber, which was a plainly furnished and commonplace room. As we
     moved across it in the direction of the window, Holmes fell back
     until he and I were the last of the group. Near the foot of the bed
     stood a dish of oranges and a carafe of water. As we passed it
     Holmes, to my unutterable astonishment, leaned over in front of me
     and deliberately knocked the whole thing over. The glass smashed into
     a thousand pieces and the fruit rolled about into every corner of the
     room.

     "You've done it now, Watson," said he, coolly. "A pretty mess you've
     made of the carpet."

     I stooped in some confusion and began to pick up the fruit,
     understanding for some reason my companion desired me to take the
     blame upon myself. The others did the same, and set the table on its
     legs again.

     "Hullo!" cried the Inspector, "where's he got to?"

     Holmes had disappeared.

     "Wait here an instant," said young Alec Cunningham. "The fellow is
     off his head, in my opinion. Come with me, father, and see where he
     has got to!"

     They rushed out of the room, leaving the Inspector, the Colonel, and
     me staring at each other.

     "'Pon my word, I am inclined to agree with Master Alec," said the
     official. "It may be the effect of this illness, but it seems to me
     that--"

     His words were cut short by a sudden scream of "Help! Help! Murder!"
     With a thrill I recognized the voice of that of my friend. I rushed
     madly from the room on to the landing. The cries, which had sunk down
     into a hoarse, inarticulate shouting, came from the room which we had
     first visited. I dashed in, and on into the dressing-room beyond. The
     two Cunninghams were bending over the prostrate figure of Sherlock
     Holmes, the younger clutching his throat with both hands, while the
     elder seemed to be twisting one of his wrists. In an instant the
     three of us had torn them away from him, and Holmes staggered to his
     feet, very pale and evidently greatly exhausted.

     "Arrest these men, Inspector," he gasped.

     "On what charge?"

     "That of murdering their coachman, William Kirwan."

     The Inspector stared about him in bewilderment. "Oh, come now, Mr.
     Holmes," said he at last, "I'm sure you don't really mean to--"

     "Tut, man, look at their faces!" cried Holmes, curtly.

     Never certainly have I seen a plainer confession of guilt upon human
     countenances. The older man seemed numbed and dazed with a heavy,
     sullen expression upon his strongly-marked face. The son, on the
     other hand, had dropped all that jaunty, dashing style which had
     characterized him, and the ferocity of a dangerous wild beast gleamed
     in his dark eyes and distorted his handsome features. The Inspector
     said nothing, but, stepping to the door, he blew his whistle. Two of
     his constables came at the call.

     "I have no alternative, Mr. Cunningham," said he. "I trust that this
     may all prove to be an absurd mistake, but you can see that--Ah,
     would you? Drop it!" He struck out with his hand, and a revolver
     which the younger man was in the act of cocking clattered down upon
     the floor.

     "Keep that," said Holmes, quietly putting his foot upon it; "you will
     find it useful at the trial. But this is what we really wanted." He
     held up a little crumpled piece of paper.

     "The remainder of the sheet!" cried the Inspector.

     "Precisely."

     "And where was it?"

     "Where I was sure it must be. I'll make the whole matter clear to you
     presently. I think, Colonel, that you and Watson might return now,
     and I will be with you again in an hour at the furthest. The
     Inspector and I must have a word with the prisoners, but you will
     certainly see me back at luncheon time."

     Sherlock Holmes was as good as his word, for about one o'clock he
     rejoined us in the Colonel's smoking-room. He was accompanied by a
     little elderly gentleman, who was introduced to me as the Mr. Acton
     whose house had been the scene of the original burglary.

     "I wished Mr. Acton to be present while I demonstrated this small
     matter to you," said Holmes, "for it is natural that he should take a
     keen interest in the details. I am afraid, my dear Colonel, that you
     must regret the hour that you took in such a stormy petrel as I am."

     "On the contrary," answered the Colonel, warmly, "I consider it the
     greatest privilege to have been permitted to study your methods of
     working. I confess that they quite surpass my expectations, and that
     I am utterly unable to account for your result. I have not yet seen
     the vestige of a clue."

     "I am afraid that my explanation may disillusion you but it has
     always been my habit to hide none of my methods, either from my
     friend Watson or from any one who might take an intelligent interest
     in them. But, first, as I am rather shaken by the knocking about
     which I had in the dressing-room, I think that I shall help myself to
     a dash of your brandy, Colonel. My strength had been rather tried of
     late."

     "I trust that you had no more of those nervous attacks."

     Sherlock Holmes laughed heartily. "We will come to that in its turn,"
     said he. "I will lay an account of the case before you in its due
     order, showing you the various points which guided me in my decision.
     Pray interrupt me if there is any inference which is not perfectly
     clear to you.

     "It is of the highest importance in the art of detection to be able
     to recognize, out of a number of facts, which are incidental and
     which vital. Otherwise your energy and attention must be dissipated
     instead of being concentrated. Now, in this case there was not the
     slightest doubt in my mind from the first that the key of the whole
     matter must be looked for in the scrap of paper in the dead man's
     hand.

     "Before going into this, I would draw your attention to the fact
     that, if Alec Cunningham's narrative was correct, and if the
     assailant, after shooting William Kirwan, had instantly fled, then it
     obviously could not be he who tore the paper from the dead man's
     hand. But if it was not he, it must have been Alec Cunningham
     himself, for by the time that the old man had descended several
     servants were upon the scene. The point is a simple one, but the
     Inspector had overlooked it because he had started with the
     supposition that these county magnates had had nothing to do with the
     matter. Now, I make a point of never having any prejudices, and of
     following docilely wherever fact may lead me, and so, in the very
     first stage of the investigation, I found myself looking a little
     askance at the part which had been played by Mr. Alec Cunningham.

     "And now I made a very careful examination of the corner of paper
     which the Inspector had submitted to us. It was at once clear to me
     that it formed part of a very remarkable document. Here it is. Do you
     not now observed something very suggestive about it?"

     "It has a very irregular look," said the Colonel.

     "My dear sir," cried Holmes, "there cannot be the least doubt in the
     world that it has been written by two persons doing alternate words.
     When I draw your attention to the strong t's of 'at' and 'to', and
     ask you to compare them with the weak ones of 'quarter' and 'twelve,'
     you will instantly recognize the fact. A very brief analysis of these
     four words would enable you to say with the utmost confidence that
     the 'learn' and the 'maybe' are written in the stronger hand, and the
     'what' in the weaker."

     "By Jove, it's as clear as day!" cried the Colonel. "Why on earth
     should two men write a letter in such a fashion?"

     "Obviously the business was a bad one, and one of the men who
     distrusted the other was determined that, whatever was done, each
     should have an equal hand in it. Now, of the two men, it is clear
     that the one who wrote the 'at' and 'to' was the ringleader."

     "How do you get at that?"

     "We might deduce it from the mere character of the one hand as
     compared with the other. But we have more assured reasons than that
     for supposing it. If you examine this scrap with attention you will
     come to the conclusion that the man with the stronger hand wrote all
     his words first, leaving blanks for the other to fill up. These
     blanks were not always sufficient, and you can see that the second
     man had a squeeze to fit his 'quarter' in between the 'at' and the
     'to,' showing that the latter were already written. The man who wrote
     all his words first in undoubtedly the man who planned the affair."

     "Excellent!" cried Mr. Acton.

     "But very superficial," said Holmes. "We come now, however, to a
     point which is of importance. You may not be aware that the deduction
     of a man's age from his writing is one which has brought to
     considerable accuracy by experts. In normal cases one can place a man
     in his true decade with tolerable confidence. I say normal cases,
     because ill-health and physical weakness reproduce the signs of old
     age, even when the invalid is a youth. In this case, looking at the
     bold, strong hand of the one, and the rather broken-backed appearance
     of the other, which still retains its legibility although the t's
     have begun to lose their crossing, we can say that the one was a
     young man and the other was advanced in years without being
     positively decrepit."

     "Excellent!" cried Mr. Acton again.

     "There is a further point, however, which is subtler and of greater
     interest. There is something in common between these hands. They
     belong to men who are blood-relatives. It may be most obvious to you
     in the Greek e's, but to me there are many small points which
     indicate the same thing. I have no doubt at all that a family
     mannerism can be traced in these two specimens of writing. I am only,
     of course, giving you the leading results now of my examination of
     the paper. There were twenty-three other deductions which would be of
     more interest to experts than to you. They all tend to deepen the
     impression upon my mind that the Cunninghams, father and son, had
     written this letter.

     "Having got so far, my next step was, of course, to examine into the
     details of the crime, and to see how far they would help us. I went
     up to the house with the Inspector, and saw all that was to be seen.
     The wound upon the dead man was, as I was able to determine with
     absolute confidence, fired from a revolver at the distance of
     something over four yards. There was no powder-blackening on the
     clothes. Evidently, therefore, Alec Cunningham had lied when he said
     that the two men were struggling when the shot was fired. Again, both
     father and son agreed as to the place where the man escaped into the
     road. At that point, however, as it happens, there is a broadish
     ditch, moist at the bottom. As there were no indications of bootmarks
     about this ditch, I was absolutely sure not only that the Cunninghams
     had again lied, but that there had never been any unknown man upon
     the scene at all.

     "And now I have to consider the motive of this singular crime. To get
     at this, I endeavored first of all to solve the reason of the
     original burglary at Mr. Acton's. I understood, from something which
     the Colonel told us, that a lawsuit had been going on between you,
     Mr. Acton, and the Cunninghams. Of course, it instantly occurred to
     me that they had broken into your library with the intention of
     getting at some document which might be of importance in the case."

     "Precisely so," said Mr. Acton. "There can be no possible doubt as to
     their intentions. I have the clearest claim upon half of their
     present estate, and if they could have found a single paper--which,
     fortunately, was in the strong-box of my solicitors--they would
     undoubtedly have crippled our case."

     "There you are," said Holmes, smiling. "It was a dangerous, reckless
     attempt, in which I seem to trace the influence of young Alec. Having
     found nothing they tried to divert suspicion by making it appear to
     be an ordinary burglary, to which end they carried off whatever they
     could lay their hands upon. That is all clear enough, but there was
     much that was still obscure. What I wanted above all was to get the
     missing part of that note. I was certain that Alec had torn it out of
     the dead man's hand, and almost certain that he must have thrust it
     into the pocket of his dressing-gown. Where else could he have put
     it? The only question was whether it was still there. It was worth an
     effort to find out, and for that object we all went up to the house.

     "The Cunninghams joined us, as you doubtless remember, outside the
     kitchen door. It was, of course, of the very first importance that
     they should not be reminded of the existence of this paper, otherwise
     they would naturally destroy it without delay. The Inspector was
     about to tell them the importance which we attached to it when, by
     the luckiest chance in the world, I tumbled down in a sort of fit and
     so changed the conversation."

     "Good heavens!" cried the Colonel, laughing, "do you mean to say all
     our sympathy was wasted and your fit an imposture?"

     "Speaking professionally, it was admirably done," cried I, looking in
     amazement at this man who was forever confounding me with some new
     phase of his astuteness.

     "It is an art which is often useful," said he. "When I recovered I
     managed, by a device which had perhaps some little merit of
     ingenuity, to get old Cunningham to write the word 'twelve,' so that
     I might compare it with the 'twelve' upon the paper."

     "Oh, what an ass I have been!" I exclaimed.

     "I could see that you were commiserating me over my weakness," said
     Holmes, laughing. "I was sorry to cause you the sympathetic pain
     which I know that you felt. We then went upstairs together, and
     having entered the room and seen the dressing-gown hanging up behind
     the door, I contrived, by upsetting a table, to engage their
     attention for the moment, and slipped back to examine the pockets. I
     had hardly got the paper, however--which was, as I had expected, in
     one of them--when the two Cunninghams were on me, and would, I verily
     believe, have murdered me then and there but for your prompt and
     friendly aid. As it is, I feel that young man's grip on my throat
     now, and the father has twisted my wrist round in the effort to get
     the paper out of my hand. They saw that I must know all about it, you
     see, and the sudden change from absolute security to complete despair
     made them perfectly desperate.

     "I had a little talk with old Cunningham afterwards as to the motive
     of the crime. He was tractable enough, though his son was a perfect
     demon, ready to blow out his own or anybody else's brains if he could
     have got to his revolver. When Cunningham saw that the case against
     him was so strong he lost all heart and made a clean breast of
     everything. It seems that William had secretly followed his two
     masters on the night when they made their raid upon Mr. Acton's, and
     having thus got them into his power, proceeded, under threats of
     exposure, to levy black-mail upon them. Mr. Alec, however, was a
     dangerous man to play games of that sort with. It was a stroke of
     positive genius on his part to see in the burglary scare which was
     convulsing the country side an opportunity of plausibly getting rid
     of the man whom he feared. William was decoyed up and shot, and had
     they only got the whole of the note and paid a little more attention
     to detail in the accessories, it is very possible that suspicion
     might never have been aroused."

     "And the note?" I asked.

     Sherlock Holmes placed the subjoined paper before us.

     If you will only come around at quarter to twelve
     to the east gate you will learn what
     will very much surprise you and may
     be of the greatest service to you and also
     to Annie Morrison. But say nothing to
     anyone upon the matter

     "It is very much the sort of thing that I expected," said he. "Of
     course, we do not yet know what the relations may have been between
     Alec Cunningham, William Kirwan, and Annie Morrison. The results
     shows that the trap was skillfully baited. I am sure that you cannot
     fail to be delighted with the traces of heredity shown in the p's and
     in the tails of the g's. The absence of the i-dots in the old man's
     writing is also most characteristic. Watson, I think our quiet rest
     in the country has been a distinct success, and I shall certainly
     return much invigorated to Baker Street to-morrow." 






                                 THE CROOKED MAN

     One summer night, a few months after my marriage, I was seated by my
     own hearth smoking a last pipe and nodding over a novel, for my day's
     work had been an exhausting one.  My wife had already gone upstairs,
     and the sound of the locking of the hall door some time before told
     me that the servants had also retired.  I had risen from my seat and
     was knocking out the ashes of my pipe when I suddenly heard the clang
     of the bell.

     I looked at the clock.  It was a quarter to twelve.  This could not
     be a visitor at so late an hour.  A patient, evidently, and possibly
     an all-night sitting.  With a wry face I went out into the hall and
     opened the door.  To my astonishment it was Sherlock Holmes who stood
     upon my step.

     "Ah, Watson," said he, "I hoped that I might not be too late to catch
     you."

     "My dear fellow, pray come in."

     "You look surprised, and no wonder!  Relieved, too, I fancy!  Hum! 
     You still smoke the Arcadia mixture of your bachelor days then! 
     There's no mistaking that fluffy ash upon your coat.  It's easy to
     tell that you have been accustomed to wear a uniform, Watson.  You'll
     never pass as a pure-bred civilian as long as you keep that habit of
     carrying your handkerchief in your sleeve.  Could you put me up
     tonight?"

     "With pleasure."

     "You told me that you had bachelor quarters for one, and I see that
     you have no gentleman visitor at present.  Your hat-stand proclaims
     as much."

     "I shall be delighted if you will stay."

     "Thank you.  I'll fill the vacant peg then.  Sorry to see that you've
     had the British workman in the house.  He's a token of evil.  Not the
     drains, I hope?"

     "No, the gas."

     "Ah!  He has left two nail-marks from his boot upon your linoleum
     just where the light strikes it.  No, thank you, I had some supper at
     Waterloo, but I'll smoke a pipe with you with pleasure."

     I handed him my pouch, and he seated himself opposite to me and
     smoked for some time in silence.  I was well aware that nothing but
     business of importance would have brought him to me at such an hour,
     so I waited patiently until he should come round to it.

     "I see that you are professionally rather busy just now," said he,
     glancing very keenly across at me.

     "Yes, I've had a busy day," I answered.  "It may seem very foolish in
     your eyes," I added, "but really I don't know how you deduced it."

     Holmes chuckled to himself.

     "I have the advantage of knowing your habits, my dear Watson," said
     he.  "When your round is a short one you walk, and when it is a long
     one you use a hansom.  As I perceive that your boots, although used,
     are by no means dirty, I cannot doubt that you are at present busy
     enough to justify the hansom."

     "Excellent!" I cried.

     "Elementary," said he.  "It is one of those instances where the
     reasoner can produce an effect which seems remarkable to his
     neighbor, because the latter has missed the one little point which is
     the basis of the deduction.  The same may be said, my dear fellow,
     for the effect of some of these little sketches of yours, which is
     entirely meretricious, depending as it does upon your retaining in
     your own hands some factors in the problem which are never imparted
     to the reader.  Now, at present I am in the position of these same
     readers, for I hold in this hand several threads of one of the
     strangest cases which ever perplexed a man's brain, and yet I lack
     the one or two which are needful to complete my theory.  But I'll
     have them, Watson, I'll have them!"  His eyes kindled and a slight
     flush sprang into his thin cheeks. For an instant the veil had lifted
     upon his keen, intense nature, but for an instant only. When I
     glanced again his face had resumed that red-Indian composure which
     had made so many regard him as a machine rather than a man.

     "The problem presents features of interest," said he.  "I may even
     say exceptional features of interest.  I have already looked into the
     matter, and have come, as I think, within sight of my solution.  If
     you could accompany me in that last step you might be of considerable
     service to me."

     "I should be delighted."

     "Could you go as far as Aldershot to-morrow?"

     "I have no doubt Jackson would take my practice."

     "Very good.  I want to start by the 11.10 from Waterloo."

     "That would give me time."

     "Then, if you are not too sleepy, I will give you a sketch of what
     has happened, and of what remains to be done."

     "I was sleepy before you came.  I am quite wakeful now."

     "I will compress the story as far as may be done without omitting
     anything vital to the case.  It is conceivable that you may even have
     read some account of the matter.  It is the supposed murder of
     Colonel Barclay, of the Royal Munsters, at Aldershot, which I am
     investigating."

     "I have heard nothing of it."

     "It has not excited much attention yet, except locally.  The facts
     are only two days old.  Briefly they are these:

     "The Royal Munsters is, as you know, one of the most famous Irish
     regiments in the British army.  It did wonders both in the Crimea and
     the Mutiny, and has since that time distinguished itself upon every
     possible occasion.  It was commanded up to Monday night by James
     Barclay, a gallant veteran, who started as a full private, was raised
     to commissioned rank for his bravery at the time of the Mutiny, and
     so lived to command the regiment in which he had once carried a
     musket.

     "Colonel Barclay had married at the time when he was a sergeant, and
     his wife, whose maiden name was Miss Nancy Devoy, was the daughter of
     a former color-sergeant in the same corps.  There was, therefore, as
     can be imagined, some little social friction when the young couple
     (for they were still young) found themselves in their new
     surroundings.  They appear, however, to have quickly adapted
     themselves, and Mrs. Barclay has always, I understand, been as
     popular with the ladies of the regiment as her husband was with his
     brother officers.  I may add that she was a woman of great beauty,
     and that even now, when she has been married for upwards of thirty
     years, she is still of a striking and queenly appearance.

     "Colonel Barclay's family life appears to have been a uniformly happy
     one.  Major Murphy, to whom I owe most of my facts, assures me that
     he has never heard of any misunderstanding between the pair.  On the
     whole, he thinks that Barclay's devotion to his wife was greater than
     his wife's to Barclay.  He was acutely uneasy if he were absent from
     her for a day.  She, on the other hand, though devoted and faithful,
     was less obtrusively affectionate.  But they were regarded in the
     regiment as the very model of a middle-aged couple.  There was
     absolutely nothing in their mutual relations to prepare people for
     the tragedy which was to follow.

     "Colonel Barclay himself seems to have had some singular traits in
     his character.  He was a dashing, jovial old solder in his usual
     mood, but there were occasions on which he seemed to show himself
     capable of considerable violence and vindictiveness.  This side of
     his nature, however, appears never to have been turned towards his
     wife.  Another fact, which had struck Major Murphy and three out of
     five of the other officers with whom I conversed, was the singular
     sort of depression which came upon him at times.  As the major
     expressed it, the smile had often been struck from his mouth, as if
     by some invisible hand, when he has been joining the gaieties and
     chaff of the mess-table.  For days on end, when the mood was on him,
     he has been sunk in the deepest gloom.  This and a certain tinge of
     superstition were the only unusual traits in his character which his
     brother officers had observed.  The latter peculiarity took the form
     of a dislike to being left alone, especially after dark.  This
     puerile feature in a nature which was conspicuously manly had often
     given rise to comment and conjecture.

     "The first battalion of the Royal Munsters (which is the old 117th)
     has been stationed at Aldershot for some years.  The married officers
     live out of barracks, and the Colonel has during all this time
     occupied a villa called Lachine, about half a mile from the north
     camp.  The house stands in its own grounds, but the west side of it
     is not more than thirty yards from the high-road.  A coachman and two
     maids form the staff of servants.  These with their master and
     mistress were the sole occupants of Lachine, for the Barclays had no
     children, nor was it usual for them to have resident visitors.

     "Now for the events at Lachine between nine and ten on the evening of
     last Monday.

     "Mrs. Barclay was, it appears, a member of the Roman Catholic Church,
     and had interested herself very much in the establishment of the
     Guild of St. George, which was formed in connection with the Watt
     Street Chapel for the purpose of supplying the poor with cast-off
     clothing.  A meeting of the Guild had been held that evening at
     eight, and Mrs. Barclay had hurried over her dinner in order to be
     present at it.  When leaving the house she was heard by the coachman
     to make some commonplace remark to her husband, and to assure him
     that she would be back before very long. She then called for Miss
     Morrison, a young lady who lives in the next villa, and the two went
     off together to their meeting.  It lasted forty minutes, and at a
     quarter-past nine Mrs. Barclay returned home, having left Miss
     Morrison at her door as she passed.

     "There is a room which is used as a morning-room at Lachine.  This
     faces the road and opens by a large glass folding-door on to the
     lawn.  The lawn is thirty yards across, and is only divided from the
     highway by a low wall with an iron rail above it.  It was into this
     room that Mrs. Barclay went upon her return.  The blinds were not
     down, for the room was seldom used in the evening, but Mrs. Barclay
     herself lit the lamp and then rang the bell, asking Jane Stewart, the
     house-maid, to bring her a cup of tea, which was quite contrary to
     her usual habits.  The Colonel had been sitting in the dining-room,
     but hearing that his wife had returned he joined her in the
     morning-room.  The coachman saw him cross the hall and enter it.  He
     was never seen again alive.

     "The tea which had been ordered was brought up at the end of ten
     minutes; but the maid, as she approached the door, was surprised to
     hear the voices of her master and mistress in furious altercation. 
     She knocked without receiving any answer, and even turned the handle,
     but only to find that the door was locked upon the inside.  Naturally
     enough she ran down to tell the cook, and the two women with the
     coachman came up into the hall and listened to the dispute which was
     still raging.  They all agreed that only two voices were to be heard,
     those of Barclay and of his wife.  Barclay's remarks were subdued and
     abrupt, so that none of them were audible to the listeners.  The
     lady's, on the other hand, were most bitter, and when she raised her
     voice could be plainly heard.  'You coward!' she repeated over and
     over again.  'What can be done now?  What can be done now?  Give me
     back my life.  I will never so much as breathe the same air with you
     again!  You coward!  You Coward!'  Those were scraps of her
     conversation, ending in a sudden dreadful cry in the man's voice,
     with a crash, and a piercing scream from the woman.  Convinced that
     some tragedy had occurred, the coachman rushed to the door and strove
     to force it, while scream after scream issued from within.  He was
     unable, however, to make his way in, and the maids were too
     distracted with fear to be of any assistance to him.  A sudden
     thought struck him, however, and he ran through the hall door and
     round to the lawn upon which the long French windows open.  One side
     of the window was open, which I understand was quite usual in the
     summer-time, and he passed without difficulty into the room.  His
     mistress had ceased to scream and was stretched insensible upon a
     couch, while with his feet tilted over the side of an arm-chair, and
     his head upon the ground near the corner of the fender, was lying the
     unfortunate soldier stone dead in a pool of his own blood.

     "Naturally, the coachman's first thought, on finding that he could do
     nothing for his master, was to open the door.  But here an unexpected
     and singular difficulty presented itself.  The key was not in the
     inner side of the door, nor could he find it anywhere in the room. 
     He went out again, therefore, through the window, and having obtained
     the help of a policeman and of a medical man, he returned.  The lady,
     against whom naturally the strongest suspicion rested, was removed to
     her room, still in a state of insensibility.  The Colonel's body was
     then placed upon the sofa, and a careful examination made of the
     scene of the tragedy.

     "The injury from which the unfortunate veteran was suffering was
     found to be a jagged cut some two inches long at the back part of his
     head, which had evidently been caused by a violent blow from a blunt
     weapon.  Nor was it difficult to guess what that weapon may have
     been.  Upon the floor, close to the body, was lying a singular club
     of hard carved wood with a bone handle.  The Colonel possessed a
     varied collection of weapons brought from the different countries in
     which he had fought, and it is conjectured by the police that his
     club was among his trophies.  The servants deny having seen it
     before, but among the numerous curiosities in the house it is
     possible that it may have been overlooked.  Nothing else of
     importance was discovered in the room by the police, save the
     inexplicable fact that neither upon Mrs. Barclay's person nor upon
     that of the victim nor in any part of the room was the missing key to
     be found.  The door had eventually to be opened by a locksmith from
     Aldershot.

     "That was the state of things, Watson, when upon the Tuesday morning
     I, at the request of Major Murphy, went down to Aldershot to
     supplement the efforts of the police.  I think that you will
     acknowledge that the problem was already one of interest, but my
     observations soon made me realize that it was in truth much more
     extraordinary than would at first sight appear.

     "Before examining the room I cross-questioned the servants, but only
     succeeded in eliciting the facts which I have already stated.  One
     other detail of interest was remembered by Jane Stewart, the
     housemaid.  You will remember that on hearing the sound of the
     quarrel she descended and returned with the other servants.  On that
     first occasion, when she was alone, she says that the voices of her
     master and mistress were sunk so low that she could hear hardly
     anything, and judged by their tones rather than their words that they
     had fallen out.  On my pressing her, however, she remembered that she
     heard the word David uttered twice by the lady.  The point is of the
     utmost importance as guiding us towards the reason of the sudden
     quarrel.  The Colonel's name, you remember, was James.

     "There was one thing in the case which had made the deepest
     impression both upon the servants and the police.  This was the
     contortion of the Colonel's face.  It had set, according to their
     account, into the most dreadful expression of fear and horror which a
     human countenance is capable of assuming.  More than one person
     fainted at the mere sight of him, so terrible was the effect.  It was
     quite certain that he had foreseen his fate, and that it had caused
     him the utmost horror.  This, of course, fitted in well enough with
     the police theory, if the Colonel could have seen his wife making a
     murderous attack upon him.  Nor was the fact of the wound being on
     the back of his head a fatal objection to this, as he might have
     turned to avoid the blow.  No information could be got from the lady
     herself, who was temporarily insane from an acute attack of
     brain-fever.

     "From the police I learned that Miss Morrison, who you remember went
     out that evening with Mrs. Barclay, denied having any knowledge of
     what it was which had caused the ill-humor in which her companion had
     returned.

     "Having gathered these facts, Watson, I smoked several pipes over
     them, trying to separate those which were crucial from others which
     were merely incidental.  There could be no question that the most
     distinctive and suggestive point in the case was the singular
     disappearance of the door-key.  A most careful search had failed to
     discover it in the room.  Therefore it must have been taken from it. 
     But neither the Colonel nor the Colonel's wife could have taken it. 
     That was perfectly clear.  Therefore a third person must have entered
     the room.  And that third person could only have come in through the
     window.  It seemed to me that a careful examination of the room and
     the lawn might possibly reveal some traces of this mysterious
     individual.  You know my methods, Watson.  There was not one of them
     which I did not apply to the inquiry.  And it ended by my discovering
     traces, but very different ones from those which I had expected. 
     There had been a man in the room, and he had crossed the lawn coming
     from the road.  I was able to obtain five very clear impressions of
     his foot-marks:  one in the roadway itself, at the point where he had
     climbed the low wall, two on the lawn, and two very faint ones upon
     the stained boards near the window where he had entered.  He had
     apparently rushed across the lawn, for his toe-marks were much deeper
     than his heels.  But it was not the man who surprised me.  It was his
     companion."

     "His companion!"

     Holmes pulled a large sheet of tissue-paper out of his pocket and
     carefully unfolded it upon his knee.

     "What do you make of that?" he asked.

     The paper was covered with he tracings of the foot-marks of some
     small animal.  It had five well-marked foot-pads, an indication of
     long nails, and the whole print might be nearly as large as  a
     dessert-spoon.

     "It's a dog," said I.

     "Did you ever hear of a dog running up a curtain?  I found distinct
     traces that this creature had done so."

     "A monkey, then?"

     "But it is not the print of a monkey."

     "What can it be, then?"

     "Neither dog nor cat nor monkey nor any creature that we are familiar
     with.  I have tried to reconstruct it from the measurements.  Here
     are four prints where the beast has been standing motionless.  You
     see that it is no less than fifteen inches from fore-foot to hind. 
     Add to that the length of neck and head, and you get a creature not
     much less than two feet long--probably more if there is any tail. 
     But now observe this other measurement.  The animal has been moving,
     and we have the length of its stride.  In each case it is only about
     three inches.  You have an indication, you see, of a long body with
     very short legs attached to it.  It has not been considerate enough
     to leave any of its hair behind it.  But its general shape must be
     what I have indicated, and it can run up a curtain, and it is
     carnivorous."

     "How do you deduce that?"

     "Because it ran up the curtain.  A canary's cage was hanging in the
     window, and its aim seems to have been to get at the bird."

     "Then what was the beast?"

     "Ah, if I could give it a name it might go a long way towards solving
     the case.  On the whole, it was probably some creature of the weasel
     and stoat tribe--and yet it is larger than any of these that I have
     seen."

     "But what had it to do with the crime?"

     "That, also, is still obscure.  But we have learned a good deal, you
     perceive.  We know that a man stood in the road looking at the
     quarrel between the Barclays--the blinds were up and the room
     lighted.  We know, also, that he ran across the lawn, entered the
     room, accompanied by a strange animal, and that he either struck the
     Colonel or, as is equally possible, that the Colonel fell down from
     sheer fright at the sight of him, and cut his head on the corner of
     the fender.  Finally, we have the curious fact that the intruder
     carried away the key with him when he left."

     "Your discoveries seem to have left the business more obscure that it
     was before," said I.

     "Quite so.  They undoubtedly showed that the affair was much deeper
     than was at first conjectured.  I thought the matter over, and I came
     to the conclusion that I must approach the case from another aspect. 
     But really, Watson, I am keeping you up, and I might just as well
     tell you all this on our way to Aldershot to-morrow."

     "Thank you, you have gone rather too far to stop."

     "It is quite certain that when Mrs. Barclay left the house at
     half-past seven she was on good terms with her husband.  She was
     never, as I think I have said, ostentatiously affectionate, but she
     was heard by the coachman chatting with the Colonel in a friendly
     fashion.  Now, it was equally certain that, immediately on her
     return, she had gone to the room in which she was least likely to see
     her husband, had flown to tea as an agitated woman will, and finally,
     on his coming in to her, had broken into violent recriminations. 
     Therefore something had occurred between seven-thirty and nine
     o'clock which had completely altered her feelings towards him.  But
     Miss Morrison had been with her during the whole of that hour and a
     half.  It was absolutely certain, therefore, in spite of her denial,
     that she must know something of the matter.

     "My first conjecture was, that possibly there had been some passages
     between this young lady and the old soldier, which the former had now
     confessed to the wife.  That would account for the angry return, and
     also for the girl's denial that anything had occurred.  Nor would it
     be entirely incompatible with most of the words overhead.  But there
     was the reference to David, and there was the known affection of the
     Colonel for his wife, to weigh against it, to say nothing of the
     tragic intrusion of this other man, which might, of course, be
     entirely disconnected with what had gone before.  It was not easy to
     pick one's steps, but, on the whole, I was inclined to dismiss the
     idea that there had been anything between the Colonel and Miss
     Morrison, but more than ever convinced that the young lady held the
     clue as to what it was which had turned Mrs. Barclay to hatred of her
     husband.  I took the obvious course, therefore, of calling upon Miss
     M., of explaining to her that I was perfectly certain that she held
     the facts in her possession, and of assuring her that her friend,
     Mrs. Barclay, might find herself in the dock upon a capital charge
     unless the matter were cleared up.

     "Miss Morrison is a little ethereal slip of a girl, with timid eyes
     and blond hair, but I found her by no means wanting in shrewdness and
     common-sense.  She sat thinking for some time after I had spoken, and
     then, turning to me with a brisk air of resolution, she broke into a
     remarkable statement which I will condense for your benefit.

     "'I promised my friend that I would say nothing of the matter, and a
     promise is a promise,' said she; 'but if I can really help her when
     so serious a charge is laid against her, and when her own mouth, poor
     darling, is closed by illness, then I think I am absolved from my
     promise.  I will tell you exactly what happened upon Monday evening.

     "'We were returning from the Watt Street Mission about a quarter to
     nine o'clock.  On our way we had to pass through Hudson Street, which
     is a very quiet thoroughfare.  There is only one lamp in it, upon the
     left-hand side, and as we approached this lamp I saw a man coming
     towards us with is back very bent, and something like a box slung
     over one of his shoulders.  He appeared to be deformed, for he
     carried his head low and walked with his knees bent.  We were passing
     him when he raised his face to look at us in the circle of light
     thrown by the lamp, and as he did so he stopped and screamed out in a
     dreadful voice, "My God, it's Nancy!"  Mrs. Barclay turned as white
     as death, and would have fallen down had the dreadful-looking
     creature not caught hold of her.  I was going to call for the police,
     but she, to my surprise, spoke quite civilly to the fellow.

     "'"I thought you had been dead this thirty years, Henry," said she,
     in a shaking voice.

     "'"So I have," said he, and it was awful to hear the tones that he
     said it in.  He had a very dark, fearsome face, and a gleam in his
     eyes that comes back to me in my dreams.  His hair and whiskers were
     shot with gray, and his face was all crinkled and puckered like a
     withered apple.

     "'"Just walk on a little way, dear," said Mrs. Barclay; "I want to
     have a word with this man.  There is nothing to be afraid of."  She
     tried to speak boldly, but she was still deadly pale and could hardly
     get her words out for the trembling of her lips.

     "'I did as she asked me, and they talked together for a few minutes. 
     Then she came down the street with her eyes blazing, and I saw the
     crippled wretch standing by the lamp-post and shaking his clenched
     fists in the air as if he were made with rage.  She never said a word
     until we were at the door here, when she took me by the hand and
     begged me to tell no one what had happened.

     "'"It's an old acquaintance of mine who has come down in the world,"
     said she.  When I promised her I would say nothing she kissed me, and
     I have never seen her since.  I have told you now the whole truth,
     and if I withheld it from the police it is because I did not realize
     then the danger in which my dear friend stood.  I know that it can
     only be to her advantage that everything should be known.'

     "There was her statement, Watson, and to me, as you can imagine, it
     was like a light on a dark night.  Everything which had been
     disconnected before began at once to assume its true place, and I had
     a shadowy presentiment of the whole sequence of events.  My next step
     obviously was to find the man who had produced such a remarkable
     impression upon Mrs. Barclay.  If he were still in Aldershot it
     should not be a very difficult matter.  There are not such a very
     great number of civilians, and a deformed man was sure to have
     attracted attention.  I spent a day in the search, and by
     evening--this very evening, Watson--I had run him down.  The man's
     name is Henry Wood, and he lives in lodgings in this same street in
     which the ladies met him.  He has only been five days in the place. 
     In the character of a registration-agent I had a most interesting
     gossip with his landlady.  The man is by trade a conjurer and
     performer, going round the canteens after nightfall, and giving a
     little entertainment at each.  He carries some creature about with
     him in that box; about which the landlady seemed to be in
     considerable trepidation, for she had never seen an animal like it. 
     He uses it in some of his tricks according to her account.  So much
     the woman was able to tell me, and also that it was a wonder the man
     lived, seeing how twisted he was, and that he spoke in a strange
     tongue sometimes, and that for the last two nights she had heard him
     groaning and weeping in his bedroom.  He was all right, as far as
     money went, but in his deposit he had given her what looked like a
     bad florin.  She showed it to me, Watson, and it was an Indian rupee.

     "So now, my dear fellow, you see exactly how we stand and why it is I
     want you.  It is perfectly plain that after the ladies parted from
     this man he followed them at a distance, that he saw the quarrel
     between husband and wife through the window, that he rushed in, and
     that the creature which he carried in his box got loose.  That is all
     very certain.  But he is the only person in this world who can tell
     us exactly what happened in that room."

     "And you intend to ask him?"

     "Most certainly--but in the presence of a witness."

     "And I am the witness?"

     "If you will be so good.  If he can clear the matter up, well and
     good.  If he refuses, we have no alternative but to apply for a
     warrant."

     "But how do you know he'll be there when we return?"

     "You may be sure that I took some precautions.  I have one of my
     Baker Street boys mounting guard over him who would stick to him like
     a burr, go where he might.  We shall find him in Hudson Street
     to-morrow, Watson, and meanwhile I should be the criminal myself if I
     kept you out of bed any longer."

     It was midday when we found ourselves at the scene of the tragedy,
     and, under my companion's guidance, we made our way at once to Hudson
     Street.  In spite of his capacity for concealing his emotions, I
     could easily see that Holmes was in a state of suppressed excitement,
     while I was myself tingling with that half-sporting,
     half-intellectual pleasure which I invariably experienced when I
     associated myself with him in his investigations.

     "This is the street," said he, as we turned into a short thoroughfare
     lined with plain two-storied brick houses.  "Ah, here is Simpson to
     report."

     "He's in all right, Mr. Holmes," cried a small street Arab, running
     up to us.

     "Good, Simpson!" said Holmes, patting him on the head.  "Come along,
     Watson.  This is the house."  He sent in his card with a message that
     he had come on important business, and a moment later we were face to
     face with the man whom we had come to see.  In spite of the warm
     weather he was crouching over a fire, and the little room was like an
     oven.  The man sat all twisted and huddled in his chair in a way
     which gave an indescribably impression of deformity; but the face
     which he turned towards us, though worn and swarthy, must at some
     time have been remarkable for its beauty.  He looked suspiciously at
     us now out of yellow-shot, bilious eyes, and, without speaking or
     rising, he waved towards two chairs.

     "Mr. Henry Wood, late of India, I believe," said Holmes, affably. 
     "I've come over this little matter of Colonel Barclay's death."

     "What should I know about that?"

     "That's what I want to ascertain.  You know, I suppose, that unless
     the matter is cleared up, Mrs. Barclay, who is an old friend of
     yours, will in all probability be tried for murder."

     The man gave a violent start.

     "I don't know who you are," he cried, "nor how you come to know what
     you do know, but will you swear that this is true that you tell me?"

     "Why, they are only waiting for her to come to her senses to arrest
     her."

     "My God!  Are you in the police yourself?"

     "No."

     "What business is it of yours, then?"

     "It's every man's business to see justice done."

     "You can take my word that she is innocent."

     "Then you are guilty."

     "No, I am not."

     "Who killed Colonel James Barclay, then?"

     "It was a just providence that killed him.  But, mind you this, that
     if I had knocked his brains out, as it was in my heart to do, he
     would have had no more than his due from my hands.  If his own guilty
     conscience had not struck him down it is likely enough that I might
     have had his blood upon my soul.  You want me to tell the story. 
     Well, I don't know why I shouldn't, for there's no cause for me to be
     ashamed of it.

     "It was in this way, sir.  You see me now with my back like a camel
     and by ribs all awry, but there was a time when Corporal Henry Wood
     was the smartest man in the 117th foot.  We were in India then, in
     cantonments, at a place we'll call Bhurtee.  Barclay, who died the
     other day, was sergeant in the same company as myself, and the belle
     of the regiment, ay, and the finest girl that ever had the breath of
     life between her lips, was Nancy Devoy, the daughter of the
     color-sergeant.  There were two men that loved her, and one that she
     loved, and you'll smile when you look at this poor thing huddled
     before the fire, and hear me say that it was for my good looks that
     she loved me.

     "Well, though I had her heart, her father was set upon her marrying
     Barclay.  I was a harum-scarum, reckless lad, and he had had an
     education, and was already marked for the sword-belt.  But the girl
     held true to me, and it seemed that I would have had her when the
     Mutiny broke out, and all hell was loose in the country.

     "We were shut up in Bhurtee, the regiment of us with half a battery
     of artillery, a company of Sikhs, and a lot of civilians and
     women-folk.  There were ten thousand rebels round us, and they were
     as keen as a set of terriers round a rat-cage.  About the second week
     of it our water gave out, and it was a question whether we could
     communicate with General Neill's column, which was moving up country.
      It was our only chance, for we could not hope to fight our way out
     with all the women and children, so I volunteered to go out and to
     warn General Neill of our danger.  My offer was accepted, and I
     talked it over with Sergeant Barclay, who was supposed to know the
     ground better than any other man, and who drew up a route by which I
     might get through the rebel lines.  At ten o'clock the same night I
     started off upon my journey.  There were a thousand lives to save,
     but it was of only one that I was thinking when I dropped over the
     wall that night.

     "My way ran down a dried-up watercourse, which we hoped would screen
     me from the enemy's sentries; but as I crept round the corner of it I
     walked right into six of them, who were crouching down in the dark
     waiting for me.  In an instant I was stunned with a blow and bound
     hand and foot.  But the real blow was to my heart and not to my head,
     for as I came to and listened to as much as I could understand of
     their talk, I heard enough to tell me that my comrade, the very man
     who had arranged the way that I was to take, had betrayed me by means
     of a native servant into the hands of the enemy.

     "Well, there's no need for me to dwell on that part of it.  You know
     now what James Barclay was capable of.  Bhurtee was relieved by Neill
     next day, but the rebels took me away with them in their retreat, and
     it was many a long year before ever I saw a white face again.  I was
     tortured and tried to get away, and was captured and tortured again. 
     You can see for yourselves the state in which I was left.  Some of
     them that fled into Nepal took me with them, and then afterwards I
     was up past Darjeeling.  The hill-folk up there murdered the rebels
     who had me, and I became their slave for a time until I escaped; but
     instead of going south I had to go north, until I found myself among
     the Afghans.  There I wandered about for many a year, and at last
     came back to the Punjaub, where I lived mostly among the natives and
     picked up a living by the conjuring tricks that I had learned.  What
     use was it for me, a wretched cripple, to go back to England or to
     make myself known to my old comrades?  Even my wish for revenge would
     not make me do that.  I had rather that Nancy and my old pals should
     think of Harry Wood as having died with a straight back, than see him
     living and crawling with a stick like a chimpanzee.  They never
     doubted that I was dead, and I meant that they never should.  I heard
     that Barclay had married Nancy, and that he was rising rapidly in the
     regiment, but even that did not make me speak.

     "But when one gets old one has a longing for home.  For years I've
     been dreaming of the bright green fields and the hedges of England. 
     At last I determined to see them before I died.  I saved enough to
     bring me across, and then I came here where the soldiers are, for I
     know their ways and how to amuse them and so earn enough to keep me."

     "Your narrative is most interesting," said Sherlock Holmes.  "I have
     already heard of your meeting with Mrs. Barclay, and your mutual
     recognition.  You then, as I understand, followed her home and saw
     through the window an altercation between her husband and her, in
     which she doubtless cast his conduct to you in his teeth.  Your own
     feelings overcame you, and you ran across the lawn and broke in upon
     them."

     "I did, sir, and at the sight of me he looked as I have never seen a
     man look before, and over he went with his head on the fender.  But
     he was dead before he fell.  I read death on his face as plain as I
     can read that text over the fire.  The bare sight of me was like a
     bullet through his guilty heart."

     "And then?"

     "Then Nancy fainted, and I caught up the key of the door from her
     hand, intending to unlock it and get help.  But as I was doing it it
     seemed to me better to leave it alone and get away, for the thing
     might look black against me, and any way my secret would be out if I
     were taken.  In my haste I thrust the key into my pocket, and dropped
     my stick while I was chasing Teddy, who had run up the curtain.  When
     I got him into his box, from which he had slipped, I was off as fast
     as I could run."

     "Who's Teddy?" asked Holmes.

     The man leaned over and pulled up the front of a kind of hutch in the
     corner.  In an instant out there slipped a beautiful reddish-brown
     creature, thin and lithe, with the legs of a stoat, a long, thin
     nose, and a pair of the finest red eyes that ever I saw in an
     animal's head.

     "It's a mongoose," I cried.

     "Well, some call them that, and some call them ichneumon," said the
     man.  "Snake-catcher is what I call them, and Teddy is amazing quick
     on cobras.  I have one here without the fangs, and Teddy catches it
     every night to please the folk in the canteen.

     "Any other point, sir?"

     "Well, we may have to apply to you again if Mrs. Barclay should prove
     to be in serious trouble."

     "In that case, of course, I'd come forward."

     "But if not, there is no object in raking up this scandal against a
     dead man, foully as he has acted.  You have at least the satisfaction
     of knowing that for thirty years of his life his conscience bitterly
     reproached him for this wicked deed.  Ah, there goes Major Murphy on
     the other side of the street.  Good-bye, Wood.  I want to learn if
     anything has happened since yesterday."

     We were in time to overtake the major before he reached the corner.

     "Ah, Holmes," he said:  "I suppose you have heard that all this fuss
     has come to nothing?"

     "What then?"

     "The inquest is just over.  The medical evidence showed conclusively
     that death was due to apoplexy.  You see it was quite a simple case
     after all."

     "Oh, remarkably superficial," said Holmes, smiling.  "Come, Watson, I
     don't think we shall be wanted in Aldershot any more."

     "There's one thing," said I, as we walked down to the station.  "If
     the husband's name was James, and the other was Henry, what was this
     talk about David?"

     "That one word, my dear Watson, should have told me the whole story
     had I been the ideal reasoner which you are so fond of depicting.  It
     was evidently a term of reproach."

     "Of reproach?"

     "Yes; David strayed a little occasionally, you know, and on one
     occasion in the same direction as Sergeant James Barclay.  You
     remember the small affair of Uriah and Bathsheba?  My biblical
     knowledge is a trifle rusty, I fear, but you will find the story in
     the first or second of Samuel."






                              THE RESIDENT PATIENT

     Glancing over the somewhat incoherent series of Memoirs with which I
     have endeavored to illustrate a few of the mental peculiarities of my
     friend Mr. Sherlock Holmes, I have been struck by the difficulty
     which I have experienced in picking out examples which shall in every
     way answer my purpose. For in those cases in which Holmes has
     performed some tour de force of analytical reasoning, and has
     demonstrated the value of his peculiar methods of investigation, the
     facts themselves have often been so slight or so commonplace that I
     could not feel justified in laying them before the public. On the
     other hand, it has frequently happened that he has been concerned in
     some research where the facts have been of the most remarkable and
     dramatic character, but where the share which he has himself taken in
     determining their causes has been less pronounced than I, as his
     biographer, could wish. The small matter which I have chronicled
     under the heading of "A Study in Scarlet," and that other later one
     connected with the loss of the Gloria Scott, may serve as examples of
     this Scylla and Charybdis which are forever threatening the
     historian. It may be that in the business of which I am now about to
     write the part which my friend played is not sufficiently
     accentuated; and yet the whole train of circumstances is so
     remarkable that I cannot bring myself to omit it entirely from this
     series.

     It had been a close, rainy day in October. Our blinds were
     half-drawn, and Holmes lay curled upon the sofa, reading and
     re-reading a letter which he had received by the morning post. For
     myself, my term of service in India had trained me to stand heat
     better than cold, and a thermometer of 90 was no hardship. But the
     paper was uninteresting. Parliament had risen. Everybody was out of
     town, and I yearned for the glades of the New Forest or the shingle
     of Southsea. A depleted bank account had caused me to postpone my
     holiday, and as to my companion, neither the country nor the sea
     presented the slightest attraction to him. He loved to lie in the
     very centre of five millions of people, with his filaments stretching
     out and running through them, responsive to every little rumor or
     suspicion of unsolved crime. Appreciation of Nature found no place
     among his many gifts, and his only change was when he turned his mind
     from the evil-doer of the town to track down his brother of the
     country.

     Finding that Holmes was too absorbed for conversation, I had tossed
     aside the barren paper, and leaning back in my chair, I fell into a
     brown study. Suddenly my companion's voice broke in upon my thoughts.

     "You are right, Watson," said he. "It does seem a very preposterous
     way of settling a dispute."

     "Most preposterous!" I exclaimed, and then, suddenly realizing how he
     had echoed the inmost thought of my soul, I sat up in my chair and
     stared at him in blank amazement.

     "What is this, Holmes?" I cried. "This is beyond anything which I
     could have imagined."

     He laughed heartily at my perplexity.

     "You remember," said he, "that some little time ago, when I read you
     the passage in one of Poe's sketches, in which a close reasoner
     follows the unspoken thought of his companion, you were inclined to
     treat the matter as a mere tour de force of the author. On my
     remarking that I was constantly in the habit of doing the same thing
     you expressed incredulity."

     "Oh, no!"

     "Perhaps not with your tongue, my dear Watson, but certainly with
     your eyebrows. So when I saw you throw down your paper and enter upon
     a train of thought, I was very happy to have the opportunity of
     reading it off, and eventually of breaking into it, as a proof that I
     had been in rapport with you."

     But I was still far from satisfied. "In the example which you read to
     me," said I, "the reasoner drew his conclusions from the actions of
     the man whom he observed. If I remember right, he stumbled over a
     heap of stones, looked up at the stars, and so on. But I have been
     seated quietly in my chair, and what clues can I have given you?"

     "You do yourself an injustice. The features are given to man as the
     means by which he shall express his emotions, and yours are faithful
     servants."

     "Do you mean to say that you read my train of thoughts from my
     features?"

     "Your features, and especially your eyes. Perhaps you cannot yourself
     recall how your reverie commenced?"

     "No, I cannot."

     "Then I will tell you. After throwing down your paper, which was the
     action which drew my attention to you, you sat for half a minute with
     a vacant expression. Then your eyes fixed themselves upon your
     newly-framed picture of General Gordon, and I saw by the alteration
     in your face that a train of thought had been started. But it did not
     lead very far. Your eyes turned across to the unframed portrait of
     Henry Ward Beecher which stands upon the top of your books. You then
     glanced up at the wall, and of course your meaning was obvious. You
     were thinking that if the portrait were framed it would just cover
     that bare space and correspond with Gordon's picture over there."

     "You have followed me wonderfully!" I exclaimed.

     "So far I could hardly have gone astray. But now your thoughts went
     back to Beecher, and you looked hard across as if you were studying
     the character in his features. Then your eyes ceased to pucker, but
     you continued to look across, and your face was thoughtful. You were
     recalling the incidents of Beecher's career. I was well aware that
     you could not do this without thinking of the mission which he
     undertook on behalf of the North at the time of the Civil War, for I
     remember you expressing your passionate indignation at the way in
     which he was received by the more turbulent of our people. You felt
     so strongly about it that I knew you could not think of Beecher
     without thinking of that also. When a moment later I saw your eyes
     wander away from the picture, I suspected that your mind had now
     turned to the Civil War, and when I observed that your lips set, your
     eyes sparkled, and your hands clinched, I was positive that you were
     indeed thinking of the gallantry which was shown by both sides in
     that desperate struggle. But then, again, your face grew sadder; you
     shook your head. You were dwelling upon the sadness and horror and
     useless waste of life. Your hand stole towards your own old wound,
     and a smile quivered on your lips, which showed me that the
     ridiculous side of this method of settling international questions
     had forced itself upon your mind. At this point I agreed with you
     that it was preposterous, and was glad to find that all my deductions
     had been correct."

     "Absolutely!" said I. "And now that you have explained it, I confess
     that I am as amazed as before."

     "It was very superficial, my dear Watson, I assure you. I should not
     have intruded it upon your attention had you not shown some
     incredulity the other day. But the evening has brought a breeze with
     it. What do you say to a ramble through London?"

     I was weary of our little sitting-room and gladly acquiesced. For
     three hours we strolled about together, watching the ever-changing
     kaleidoscope of life as it ebbs and flows through Fleet Street and
     the Strand. His characteristic talk, with its keen observance of
     detail and subtle power of inference held me amused and enthralled.
     It was ten o'clock before we reached Baker Street again. A brougham
     was waiting at our door.

     "Hum! A doctor's--general practitioner, I perceive," said Holmes.
     "Not been long in practice, but has had a good deal to do. Come to
     consult us, I fancy! Lucky we came back!"

     I was sufficiently conversant with Holmes's methods to be able to
     follow his reasoning, and to see that the nature and state of the
     various medical instruments in the wicker basket which hung in the
     lamplight inside the brougham had given him the data for his swift
     deduction. The light in our window above showed that this late visit
     was indeed intended for us. With some curiosity as to what could have
     sent a brother medico to us at such an hour, I followed Holmes into
     our sanctum.

     A pale, taper-faced man with sandy whiskers rose up from a chair by
     the fire as we entered. His age may not have been more than three or
     four and thirty, but his haggard expression and unhealthy hue told of
     a life which has sapped his strength and robbed him of his youth. His
     manner was nervous and shy, like that of a sensitive gentleman, and
     the thin white hand which he laid on the mantelpiece as he rose was
     that of an artist rather than of a surgeon. His dress was quiet and
     sombre--a black frock-coat, dark trousers, and a touch of color about
     his necktie.

     "Good-evening, doctor," said Holmes, cheerily. "I am glad to see that
     you have only been waiting a very few minutes."

     "You spoke to my coachman, then?"

     "No, it was the candle on the side-table that told me. Pray resume
     your seat and let me know how I can serve you."

     "My name is Doctor Percy Trevelyan," said our visitor, "and I live at
     403 Brook Street."

     "Are you not the author of a monograph upon obscure nervous lesions?"
     I asked.

     His pale cheeks flushed with pleasure at hearing that his work was
     known to me.

     "I so seldom hear of the work that I thought it was quite dead," said
     he. "My publishers gave me a most discouraging account of its sale.
     You are yourself, I presume, a medical man?"

     "A retired army surgeon."

     "My own hobby has always been nervous disease. I should wish to make
     it an absolute specialty, but, of course, a man must take what he can
     get at first. This, however, is beside the question, Mr. Sherlock
     Holmes, and I quite appreciate how valuable your time is. The fact is
     that a very singular train of events has occurred recently at my
     house in Brook Street, and to-night they came to such a head that I
     felt it was quite impossible for me to wait another hour before
     asking for your advice and assistance."

     Sherlock Holmes sat down and lit his pipe. "You are very welcome to
     both," said he. "Pray let me have a detailed account of what the
     circumstances are which have disturbed you."

     "One or two of them are so trivial," said Dr. Trevelyan, "that really
     I am almost ashamed to mention them. But the matter is so
     inexplicable, and the recent turn which it has taken is so elaborate,
     that I shall lay it all before you, and you shall judge what is
     essential and what is not.

     "I am compelled, to begin with, to say something of my own college
     career. I am a London University man, you know, and I am sure that
     you will not think that I am unduly singing my own praises if I say
     that my student career was considered by my professors to be a very
     promising one. After I had graduated I continued to devote myself to
     research, occupying a minor position in King's College Hospital, and
     I was fortunate enough to excite considerable interest by my research
     into the pathology of catalepsy, and finally to win the Bruce
     Pinkerton prize and medal by the monograph on nervous lesions to
     which your friend has just alluded. I should not go too far if I were
     to say that there was a general impression at that time that a
     distinguished career lay before me.

     "But the one great stumbling-block lay in my want of capital. As you
     will readily understand, a specialist who aims high is compelled to
     start in one of a dozen streets in the Cavendish Square quarter, all
     of which entail enormous rents and furnishing expenses. Besides this
     preliminary outlay, he must be prepared to keep himself for some
     years, and to hire a presentable carriage and horse. To do this was
     quite beyond my power, and I could only hope that by economy I might
     in ten years' time save enough to enable me to put up my plate.
     Suddenly, however, an unexpected incident opened up quite a new
     prospect to me.

     "This was a visit from a gentleman of the name of Blessington, who
     was a complete stranger to me. He came up to my room one morning, and
     plunged into business in an instant.

     "'You are the same Percy Trevelyan who has had so distinguished a
     career and won a great prize lately?' said he.

     "I bowed.

     "'Answer me frankly,' he continued, 'for you will find it to your
     interest to do so. You have all the cleverness which makes a
     successful man. Have you the tact?'

     "I could not help smiling at the abruptness of the question.

     "'I trust that I have my share,' I said.

     "'Any bad habits? Not drawn towards drink, eh?'

     "'Really, sir!' I cried.

     "'Quite right! That's all right! But I was bound to ask. With all
     these qualities, why are you not in practice?'

     "I shrugged my shoulders.

     "'Come, come!' said he, in his bustling way. 'It's the old story.
     More in your brains than in your pocket, eh? What would you say if I
     were to start you in Brook Street?'

     "I stared at him in astonishment.

     "'Oh, it's for my sake, not for yours,' he cried.  'I'll be perfectly
     frank with you, and if it suits you it will suit me very well. I have
     a few thousands to invest, d'ye see, and I think I'll sink them in
     you.'

     "'But why?' I gasped.

     "'Well, it's just like any other speculation, and safer than most.'

     "'What am I to do, then?'

     "'I'll tell you. I'll take the house, furnish it, pay the maids, and
     run the whole place. All you have to do is just to wear out your
     chair in the consulting-room. I'll let you have pocket-money and
     everything. Then you hand over to me three quarters of what you earn,
     and you keep the other quarter for yourself.'

     "This was the strange proposal, Mr. Holmes, with which the man
     Blessington approached me. I won't weary you with the account of how
     we bargained and negotiated. It ended in my moving into the house
     next Lady-day, and starting in practice on very much the same
     conditions as he had suggested. He came himself to live with me in
     the character of a resident patient. His heart was weak, it appears,
     and he needed constant medical supervision. He turned the two best
     rooms of the first floor into a sitting-room and bedroom for himself.
     He was a man of singular habits, shunning company and very seldom
     going out. His life was irregular, but in one respect he was
     regularity itself. Every evening, at the same hour, he walked into
     the consulting-room, examined the books, put down five and
     three-pence for every guinea that I had earned, and carried the rest
     off to the strong-box in his own room.

     "I may say with confidence that he never had occasion to regret his
     speculation. From the first it was a success. A few good cases and
     the reputation which I had won in the hospital brought me rapidly to
     the front, and during the last few years I have made him a rich man.

     "So much, Mr. Holmes, for my past history and my relations with Mr.
     Blessington. It only remains for me now to tell you what has occurred
     to bring me her to-night.

     "Some weeks ago Mr. Blessington came down to me in, as it seemed to
     me, a state of considerable agitation. He spoke of some burglary
     which, he said, had been committed in the West End, and he appeared,
     I remember, to be quite unnecessarily excited about it, declaring
     that a day should not pass before we should add stronger bolts to our
     windows and doors. For a week he continued to be in a peculiar state
     of restlessness, peering continually out of the windows, and ceasing
     to take the short walk which had usually been the prelude to his
     dinner. From his manner it struck me that he was in mortal dread of
     something or somebody, but when I questioned him upon the point he
     became so offensive that I was compelled to drop the subject.
     Gradually, as time passed, his fears appeared to die away, and he had
     renewed his former habits, when a fresh event reduced him to the
     pitiable state of prostration in which he now lies.

     "What happened was this. Two days ago I received the letter which I
     now read to you. Neither address nor date is attached to it.

     "'A Russian nobleman who is now resident in England,' it runs, 'would
     be glad to avail himself of the professional assistance of Dr. Percy
     Trevelyan. He has been for some years a victim to cataleptic attacks,
     on which, as is well known, Dr. Trevelyan is an authority. He
     proposes to call at about quarter past six to-morrow evening, if Dr.
     Trevelyan will make it convenient to be at home.'

     "This letter interest me deeply, because the chief difficulty in the
     study of catalepsy is the rareness of the disease. You may believe,
     than, that I was in my consulting-room when, at the appointed hour,
     the page showed in the patient.

     He was an elderly man, thin, demure, and common-place--by no means
     the conception one forms of a Russian nobleman. I was much more
     struck by the appearance of his companion. This was a tall young man,
     surprisingly handsome, with a dark, fierce face, and the limbs and
     chest of a Hercules. He had his hand under the other's arm as they
     entered, and helped him to a chair with a tenderness which one would
     hardly have expected from his appearance.

     "'You will excuse my coming in, doctor,' said he to me, speaking
     English with a slight lisp. 'This is my father, and his health is a
     matter of the most overwhelming importance to me.'

     "I was touched by this filial anxiety. 'You would, perhaps, care to
     remain during the consultation?' said I.

     "'Not for the world,' he cried with a gesture of horror. 'It is more
     painful to me than I can express. If I were to see my father in one
     of these dreadful seizures I am convinced that I should never survive
     it. My own nervous system is an exceptionally sensitive one. With
     your permission, I will remain in the waiting-room while you go into
     my father's case.'

     "To this, of course, I assented, and the young man withdrew. The
     patient and I then plunged into a discussion of his case, of which I
     took exhaustive notes. He was not remarkable for intelligence, and
     his answers were frequently obscure, which I attributed to his
     limited acquaintance with our language. Suddenly, however, as I sat
     writing, he ceased to give any answer at all to my inquiries, and on
     my turning towards him I was shocked to see that he was sitting bolt
     upright in his chair, staring at me with a perfectly blank and rigid
     face. He was again in the grip of his mysterious malady.

     "My first feeling, as I have just said, was one of pity and horror.
     My second, I fear, was rather one of professional satisfaction. I
     made notes of my patient's pulse and temperature, tested the rigidity
     of his muscles, and examined his reflexes. There was nothing markedly
     abnormal in any of these conditions, which harmonized with my former
     experiences. I had obtained good results in such cases by the
     inhalation of nitrite of amyl, and the present seemed an admirable
     opportunity of testing its virtues. The bottle was downstairs in my
     laboratory, so leaving my patient seated in his chair, I ran down to
     get it. There was some little delay in finding it--five minutes, let
     us say--and then I returned. Imagine my amazement to find the room
     empty and the patient gone.

     "Of course, my first act was to run into the waiting-room. The son
     had gone also. The hall door had been closed, but not shut. My page
     who admits patients is a new boy and by no means quick. He waits
     downstairs, and runs up to show patients out when I ring the
     consulting-room bell. He had heard nothing, and the affair remained a
     complete mystery. Mr. Blessington came in from his walk shortly
     afterwards, but I did not say anything to him upon the subject, for,
     to tell the truth, I have got in the way of late of holding as little
     communication with him as possible.

     "Well, I never thought that I should see anything more of the Russian
     and his son, so you can imagine my amazement when, at the very same
     hour this evening, they both came marching into my consulting-room,
     just as they had done before.

     "'I feel that I owe you a great many apologies for my abrupt
     departure yesterday, doctor,' said my patient.

     "'I confess that I was very much surprised at it,' said I.

     "'Well, the fact is,' he remarked, 'that when I recover from these
     attacks my mind is always very clouded as to all that has gone
     before. I woke up in a strange room, as it seemed to me, and made my
     way out into the street in a sort of dazed way when you were absent.'

     "'And I,' said the son, 'seeing my father pass the door of the
     waiting-room, naturally thought that the consultation had come to an
     end. It was not until we had reached home that I began to realize the
     true state of affairs.'

     "'Well,' said I, laughing, 'there is no harm done except that you
     puzzled me terribly; so if you, sir, would kindly step into the
     waiting-room I shall be happy to continue our consultation which was
     brought to so abrupt an ending.'

     "For half an hour or so I discussed that old gentleman's symptoms
     with him, and then, having prescribed for him, I saw him go off upon
     the arm of his son.

     "I have told you that Mr. Blessington generally chose this hour of
     the day for his exercise. He came in shortly afterwards and passed
     upstairs. An instant later I heard him running down, and he burst
     into my consulting-room like a man who is mad with panic.

     "'Who has been in my room?' he cried.

     "'No one,' said I.

     "'It's a lie!' He yelled. 'Come up and look!'

     "I passed over the grossness of his language, as he seemed half out
     of his mind with fear. When I went upstairs with him he pointed to
     several footprints upon the light carpet.

     "'D'you mean to say those are mine?' he cried.

     "They were certainly very much larger than any which he could have
     made, and were evidently quite fresh. It rained hard this afternoon,
     as you know, and my patients were the only people who called. It must
     have been the case, then, that the man in the waiting-room had, for
     some unknown reason, while I was busy with the other, ascended to the
     room of my resident patient. Nothing has been touched or taken, but
     there were the footprints to prove that the intrusion was an
     undoubted fact.

     "Mr. Blessington seemed more excited over the matter than I should
     have thought possible, though of course it was enough to disturb
     anybody's peace of mind. He actually sat crying in an arm-chair, and
     I could hardly get him to speak coherently. It was his suggestion
     that I should come round to you, and of course I at once saw the
     propriety of it, for certainly the incident is a very singular one,
     though he appears to completely overrate its importance. If you would
     only come back with me in my brougham, you would at least be able to
     soothe him, though I can hardly hope that you will be able to explain
     this remarkable occurrence."

     Sherlock Holmes had listened to this long narrative with an
     intentness which showed me that his interest was keenly aroused. His
     face was as impassive as ever, but his lids had drooped more heavily
     over his eyes, and his smoke had curled up more thickly from his pipe
     to emphasize each curious episode in the doctor's tale. As our
     visitor concluded, Holmes sprang up without a word, handed me my hat,
     picked his own from the table, and followed Dr. Trevelyan to the
     door. Within a quarter of an hour we had been dropped at the door of
     the physician's residence in Brook Street, one of those sombre,
     flat-faced houses which one associates with a West-End practice. A
     small page admitted us, and we began at once to ascend the broad,
     well-carpeted stair.

     But a singular interruption brought us to a standstill. The light at
     the top was suddenly whisked out, and from the darkness came a reedy,
     quivering voice.

     "I have a pistol," it cried. "I give you my word that I'll fire if
     you come any nearer."

     "This really grows outrageous, Mr. Blessington," cried Dr. Trevelyan.

     "Oh, then it is you, doctor," said the voice, with a great heave of
     relief. "But those other gentlemen, are they what they pretend to
     be?"

     We were conscious of a long scrutiny out of the darkness.

     "Yes, yes, it's all right," said the voice at last. "You can come up,
     and I am sorry if my precautions have annoyed you."

     He relit the stair gas as he spoke, and we saw before us a
     singular-looking man, whose appearance, as well as his voice,
     testified to his jangled nerves. He was very fat, but had apparently
     at some time been much fatter, so that the skin hung about his face
     in loose pouches, like the cheeks of a blood-hound. He was of a
     sickly color, and his thin, sandy hair seemed to bristle up with the
     intensity of his emotion. In his hand he held a pistol, but he thrust
     it into his pocket as we advanced.

     "Good-evening, Mr. Holmes," said he. "I am sure I am very much
     obliged to you for coming round. No one ever needed your advice more
     than I do. I suppose that Dr. Trevelyan has told you of this most
     unwarrantable intrusion into my rooms."

     "Quite so," said Holmes. "Who are these two men Mr. Blessington, and
     why do they wish to molest you?"

     "Well, well," said the resident patient, in a nervous fashion, "of
     course it is hard to say that. You can hardly expect me to answer
     that, Mr. Holmes."

     "Do you mean that you don't know?"

     "Come in here, if you please. Just have the kindness to step in
     here."

     He led the way into his bedroom, which was large and comfortably
     furnished.

     "You see that," said he, pointing to a big black box at the end of
     his bed. "I have never been a very rich man, Mr. Holmes--never made
     but one investment in my life, as Dr. Trevelyan would tell you. But I
     don't believe in bankers. I would never trust a banker, Mr. Holmes.
     Between ourselves, what little I have is in that box, so you can
     understand what it means to me when unknown people force themselves
     into my rooms."

     Holmes looked at Blessington in his questioning way and shook his
     head.

     "I cannot possibly advise you if you try to deceive me," said he.

     "But I have told you everything."

     Holmes turned on his heel with a gesture of disgust. "Good-night, Dr.
     Trevelyan," said he.

     "And no advice for me?" cried Blessington, in a breaking voice.

     "My advice to your, sir, is to speak the truth."

     A minute later we were in the street and walking for home. We had
     crossed Oxford Street and were half way down Harley Street before I
     could get a word from my companion.

     "Sorry to bring you out on such a fool's errand, Watson," he said at
     last. "It is an interesting case, too, at the bottom of it."

     "I can make little of it," I confessed.

     "Well, it is quite evident that there are two men--more, perhaps, but
     at least two--who are determined for some reason to get at this
     fellow Blessington. I have no doubt in my mind that both on the first
     and on the second occasion that young man penetrated to Blessington's
     room, while his confederate, by an ingenious device, kept the doctor
     from interfering."

     "And the catalepsy?"

     "A fraudulent imitation, Watson, though I should hardly dare to hint
     as much to our specialist. It is a very easy complaint to imitate. I
     have done it myself."

     "And then?"

     "By the purest chance Blessington was out on each occasion. Their
     reason for choosing so unusual an hour for a consultation was
     obviously to insure that there should be no other patient in the
     waiting-room. It just happened, however, that this hour coincided
     with Blessington's constitutional, which seems to show that they were
     not very well acquainted with his daily routine. Of course, if they
     had been merely after plunder they would at least have made some
     attempt to search for it. Besides, I can read in a man's eye when it
     is his own skin that he is frightened for. It is inconceivable that
     this fellow could have made two such vindictive enemies as these
     appear to be without knowing of it. I hold it, therefore, to be
     certain that he does know who these men are, and that for reasons of
     his own he suppresses it. It is just possible that to-morrow may find
     him in a more communicative mood."

     "Is there not one alternative," I suggested, "grotesquely improbably,
     no doubt, but still just conceivable? Might the whole story of the
     cataleptic Russian and his son be a concoction of Dr. Trevelyan's,
     who has, for his own purposes, been in Blessington's rooms?"

     I saw in the gaslight that Holmes wore an amused smile at this
     brilliant departure of mine.

     "My dear fellow," said he, "it was one of the first solutions which
     occurred to me, but I was soon able to corroborate the doctor's tale.
     This young man has left prints upon the stair-carpet which made it
     quite superfluous for me to ask to see those which he had made in the
     room. When I tell you that his shoes were square-toed instead of
     being pointed like Blessington's, and were quite an inch and a third
     longer than the doctor's, you will acknowledge that there can be no
     doubt as to his individuality. But we may sleep on it now, for I
     shall be surprised if we do not hear something further from Brook
     Street in the morning."

     Sherlock Holmes's prophecy was soon fulfilled, and in a dramatic
     fashion. At half-past seven next morning, in the first glimmer of
     daylight, I found him standing by my bedside in his dressing-gown.

     "There's a brougham waiting for us, Watson," said he.

     "What's the matter, then?"

     "The Brook Street business."

     "Any fresh news?"

     "Tragic, but ambiguous," said he, pulling up the blind.  "Look at
     this--a sheet from a note-book, with 'For God's sake come at once--P.
     T.,' scrawled upon it in pencil. Our friend, the doctor, was hard put
     to it when he wrote this. Come along, my dear fellow, for it's an
     urgent call."

     In a quarter of an hour or so we were back at the physician's house. 
     He came running out to meet us with a face of horror.

     "Oh, such a business!" he cried, with his hands to his temples.

     "What then?"

     "Blessington has committed suicide!"

     Holmes whistled.

     "Yes, he hanged himself during the night."

     We had entered, and the doctor had preceded us into what was
     evidently his waiting-room.

     "I really hardly know what I am doing," he cried. "The police are
     already upstairs. It has shaken me most dreadfully."

     "When did you find it out?"

     "He has a cup of tea taken in to him early every morning. When the
     maid entered, about seven, there the unfortunate fellow was hanging
     in the middle of the room. He had tied his cord to the hook on which
     the heavy lamp used to hang, and he had jumped off from the top of
     the very box that he showed us yesterday."

     Holmes stood for a moment in deep thought.

     "With your permission," said he at last, "I should like to go
     upstairs and look into the matter."

     We both ascended, followed by the doctor.

     It was a dreadful sight which met us as we entered the bedroom door.
     I have spoken of the impression of flabbiness which this man
     Blessington conveyed. As he dangled from the hook it was exaggerated
     and intensified until he was scarce human in his appearance. The neck
     was drawn out like a plucked chicken's, making the rest of him seem
     the more obese and unnatural by the contrast. He was clad only in his
     long night-dress, and his swollen ankles and ungainly feet protruded
     starkly from beneath it. Beside him stood a smart-looking
     police-inspector, who was taking notes in a pocket-book.

     "Ah, Mr. Holmes," said he, heartily, as my friend entered, "I am
     delighted to see you."

     "Good-morning, Lanner," answered Holmes; "you won't think me an
     intruder, I am sure. Have you heard of the events which led up to
     this affair?"

     "Yes, I heard something of them."

     "Have you formed any opinion?"

     "As far as I can see, the man has been driven out of his senses by
     fright. The bed has been well slept in, you see. There's his
     impression deep enough. It's about five in the morning, you know,
     that suicides are most common. That would be about his time for
     hanging himself. It seems to have been a very deliberate affair."

     "I should say that he has been dead about three hours, judging by the
     rigidity of the muscles," said I.

     "Noticed anything peculiar about the room?" asked Holmes.

     "Found a screw-driver and some screws on the wash-hand stand. Seems
     to have smoked heavily during the night, too. Here are four
     cigar-ends that I picked out of the fireplace."

     "Hum!" said Holmes, "have you got his cigar-holder?"

     "No, I have seen none."

     "His cigar-case, then?"

     "Yes, it was in his coat-pocket."

     Holmes opened it and smelled the single cigar which it contained.

     "Oh, this is an Havana, and these others are cigars of the peculiar
     sort which are imported by the Dutch from their East Indian colonies.
     They are usually wrapped in straw, you know, and are thinner for
     their length than any other brand." He picked up the four ends and
     examined them with his pocket-lens.

     "Two of these have been smoked from a holder and two without," said
     he. "Two have been cut by a not very sharp knife, and two have had
     the ends bitten off by a set of excellent teeth. This is no suicide,
     Mr. Lanner. It is a very deeply planned and cold-blooded murder."

     "Impossible!" cried the inspector.

     "And why?"

     "Why should any one murder a man in so clumsy a fashion as by hanging
     him?"

     "That is what we have to find out."

     "How could they get in?"

     "Through the front door."

     "It was barred in the morning."

     "Then it was barred after them."

     "How do you know?"

     "I saw their traces. Excuse me a moment, and I may be able to give
     you some further information about it."

     He went over to the door, and turning the lock he examined it in his
     methodical way. Then he took out the key, which was on the inside,
     and inspected that also. The bed, the carpet, the chairs the
     mantelpiece, the dead body, and the rope were each in turn examined,
     until at last he professed himself satisfied, and with my aid and
     that of the inspector cut down the wretched object and laid it
     reverently under a sheet.

     "How about this rope?" he asked.

     "It is cut off this," said Dr. Trevelyan, drawing a large coil from
     under the bed. "He was morbidly nervous of fire, and always kept this
     beside him, so that he might escape by the window in case the stairs
     were burning."

     "That must have saved them trouble," said Holmes, thoughtfully. "Yes,
     the actual facts are very plain, and I shall be surprised if by the
     afternoon I cannot give you the reasons for them as well. I will take
     this photograph of Blessington, which I see upon the mantelpiece, as
     it may help me in my inquiries."

     "But you have told us nothing!" cried the doctor.

     "Oh, there can be no doubt as to the sequence of events," said
     Holmes. "There were three of them in it: the young man, the old man,
     and a third, to whose identity I have no clue. The first two, I need
     hardly remark, are the same who masqueraded as the Russian count and
     his son, so we can give a very full description of them. They were
     admitted by a confederate inside the house. If I might offer you a
     word of advice, Inspector, it would be to arrest the page, who, as I
     understand, has only recently come into your service, Doctor."

     "The young imp cannot be found," said Dr. Trevelyan; "the maid and
     the cook have just been searching for him."

     Holmes shrugged his shoulders.

     "He has played a not unimportant part in this drama," said he. "The
     three men having ascended the stairs, which they did on tiptoe, the
     elder man first, the younger man second, and the unknown man in the
     rear--"

     "My dear Holmes!" I ejaculated.

     "Oh, there could be no question as to the superimposing of the
     footmarks. I had the advantage of learning which was which last
     night. They ascended, then, to Mr. Blessington's room, the door of
     which they found to be locked. With the help of a wire, however, they
     forced round the key. Even without the lens you will perceive, by the
     scratches on this ward, where the pressure was applied.

     "On entering the room their first proceeding must have been to gag
     Mr. Blessington. He may have been asleep, or he may have been so
     paralyzed with terror as to have been unable to cry out. These walls
     are thick, and it is conceivable that his shriek, if he had time to
     utter one, was unheard.

     "Having secured him, it is evident to me that a consultation of some
     sort was held. Probably it was something in the nature of a judicial
     proceeding. It must have lasted for some time, for it was then that
     these cigars were smoked. The older man sat in that wicker chair; it
     was he who used the cigar-holder. The younger man sat over yonder; he
     knocked his ash off against the chest of drawers. The third fellow
     paced up and down. Blessington, I think, sat upright in the bed, but
     of that I cannot be absolutely certain.

     "Well, it ended by their taking Blessington and hanging him. The
     matter was so prearranged that it is my belief that they brought with
     them some sort of block or pulley which might serve as a gallows.
     That screw-driver and those screws were, as I conceive, for fixing it
     up. Seeing the hook, however they naturally saved themselves the
     trouble. Having finished their work they made off, and the door was
     barred behind them by their confederate."

     We had all listened with the deepest interest to this sketch of the
     night's doings, which Holmes had deduced from signs so subtle and
     minute that, even when he had pointed them out to us, we could
     scarcely follow him in his reasoning. The inspector hurried away on
     the instant to make inquiries about the page, while Holmes and I
     returned to Baker Street for breakfast.

     "I'll be back by three," said he, when we had finished our meal.
     "Both the inspector and the doctor will meet me here at that hour,
     and I hope by that time to have cleared up any little obscurity which
     the case may still present."

     Our visitors arrived at the appointed time, but it was a quarter to
     four before my friend put in an appearance. From his expression as he
     entered, however, I could see that all had gone well with him.

     "Any news, Inspector?"

     "We have got the boy, sir."

     "Excellent, and I have got the men."

     "You have got them!" we cried, all three.

     "Well, at least I have got their identity. This so-called Blessington
     is, as I expected, well known at headquarters, and so are his
     assailants. Their names are Biddle, Hayward, and Moffat."

     "The Worthingdon bank gang," cried the inspector.

     "Precisely," said Holmes.

     "Then Blessington must have been Sutton."

     "Exactly," said Holmes.

     "Why, that makes it as clear as crystal," said the inspector.

     But Trevelyan and I looked at each other in bewilderment.

     "You must surely remember the great Worthingdon bank business," said
     Holmes. "Five men were in it--these four and a fifth called
     Cartwright. Tobin, the care-taker, was murdered, and the thieves got
     away with seven thousand pounds. This was in 1875. They were all five
     arrested, but the evidence against them was by no means conclusive.
     This Blessington or Sutton, who was the worst of the gang, turned
     informer. On his evidence Cartwright was hanged and the other three
     got fifteen years apiece. When they got out the other day, which was
     some years before their full term, they set themselves, as you
     perceive, to hunt down the traitor and to avenge the death of their
     comrade upon him. Twice they tried to get at him and failed; a third
     time, you see, it came off. Is there anything further which I can
     explain, Dr. Trevelyan?"

     "I think you have made it all remarkable clear," said the doctor. "No
     doubt the day on which he was perturbed was the day when he had seen
     of their release in the newspapers."

     "Quite so. His talk about a burglary was the merest blind."

     "But why could he not tell you this?"

     "Well, my dear sir, knowing the vindictive character of his old
     associates, he was trying to hide his own identity from everybody as
     long as he could. His secret was a shameful one, and he could not
     bring himself to divulge it. However, wretch as he was, he was still
     living under the shield of British law, and I have no doubt,
     Inspector, that you will see that, though that shield may fail to
     guard, the sword of justice is still there to avenge."

     Such were the singular circumstances in connection with the Resident
     Patient and the Brook Street Doctor. From that night nothing has been
     seen of the three murderers by the police, and it is surmised at
     Scotland Yard that they were among the passengers of the ill-fated
     steamer Norah Creina, which was lost some years ago with all hands
     upon the Portuguese coast, some leagues to the north of Oporto. The
     proceedings against the page broke down for want of evidence, and the
     Brook Street Mystery, as it was called, has never until now been
     fully dealt with in any public print.






                              THE GREEK INTERPRETER

     During my long and intimate acquaintance with Mr. Sherlock Holmes I
     had never heard him refer to his relations, and hardly ever to his
     own early life.  This reticence upon his part had increased the
     somewhat inhuman effect which he produced upon me, until sometimes I
     found myself regarding him as an isolated phenomenon, a brain without
     a heart, as deficient in human sympathy as he was pre-eminent in
     intelligence.  His aversion to women and his disinclination to form
     new friendships were both typical of his unemotional character, but
     not more so than his complete suppression of every reference to his
     own people.  I had come to believe that he was an orphan with no
     relatives living, but one day, to my very great surprise, he began to
     talk to me about his brother.

     It was after tea on a summer evening, and the conversation, which had
     roamed in a desultory, spasmodic fashion from golf clubs to the
     causes of the change in the obliquity of the ecliptic, came round at
     last to the question of atavism and hereditary aptitudes.  The point
     under discussion was, how far any singular gift in an individual was
     due to his ancestry and how far to his own early training.

     "In your own case," said I, "from all that you have told me, it seems
     obvious that your faculty of observation and your peculiar facility
     for deduction are due to your own systematic training."

     "To some extent," he answered, thoughtfully.  "My ancestors were
     country squires, who appear to have led much the same life as is
     natural to their class.  But, none the less, my turn that way is in
     my veins, and may have come with my grandmother, who was the sister
     of Vernet, the French artist.  Art in the blood is liable to take the
     strangest forms."

     "But how do you know that it is hereditary?"

     "Because my brother Mycroft possesses it in a larger degree than I
     do."

     This was news to me indeed.  If there were another man with such
     singular powers in England, how was it that neither police nor public
     had heard of him?  I put the question, with a hint that it was my
     companion's modesty which made him acknowledge his brother as his
     superior.  Holmes laughed at my suggestion.

     "My dear Watson," said he, "I cannot agree with those who rank
     modesty among the virtues.  To the logician all things should be seen
     exactly as they are, and to underestimate one's self is as much a
     departure from truth as to exaggerate one's own powers.  When I say,
     therefore, that Mycroft has better powers of observation than I, you
     may take it that I am speaking the exact and literal truth."

     "Is he your junior?"

     "Seven years my senior."

     "How comes it that he is unknown?"

     "Oh, he is very well known in his own circle."

     "Where, then?"

     "Well, in the Diogenes Club, for example."

     I had never heard of the institution, and my face must have
     proclaimed as much, for Sherlock Holmes pulled out his watch.

     "The Diogenes Club is the queerest club in London, and Mycroft one of
     the queerest men.  He's always there from quarter to five to twenty
     to eight.  It's six now, so if you care for a stroll this beautiful
     evening I shall be very happy to introduce you to two curiosities."

     Five minutes later we were in the street, walking towards Regent's
     Circus.

     "You wonder," said my companion, "why it is that Mycroft does not use
     his powers for detective work.  He is incapable of it."

     "But I thought you said--"

     "I said that he was my superior in observation and deduction.  If the
     art of the detective began and ended in reasoning from an arm-chair,
     my brother would be the greatest criminal agent that ever lived.  But
     he has no ambition and no energy.  He will not even go out of his way
     to verify his own solution, and would rather be considered wrong than
     take the trouble to prove himself right.  Again and again I have
     taken a problem to him, and have received an explanation which has
     afterwards proved to be the correct one.  And yet he was absolutely
     incapable of working out the practical points which must be gone into
     before a case could be laid before a judge or jury."

     "It is not his profession, then?"

     "By no means.  What is to me a means of livelihood is to him the
     merest hobby of a dilettante.  He has an extraordinary faculty for
     figures, and audits the books in some of the government departments. 
     Mycroft lodges in Pall Mall, and he walks round the corner into
     Whitehall every morning and back every evening.  From year's end to
     year's end he takes no other exercise, and is seen nowhere else,
     except only in the Diogenes Club, which is just opposite his rooms."

     "I cannot recall the name."

     "Very likely not.  There are many men in London, you know, who, some
     from shyness, some from misanthropy, have no wish for the company of
     their fellows.  Yet they are not averse to comfortable chairs and the
     latest periodicals.  It is for the convenience of these that the
     Diogenes Club was started, and it now contains the most unsociable
     and unclubable men in town.  No member is permitted to take the least
     notice of any other one.  Save in the Stranger's Room, no talking is,
     under any circumstances, allowed, and three offences, if brought to
     the notice of the committee, render the talker liable to expulsion. 
     My brother was one of the founders, and I have myself found it a very
     soothing atmosphere."

     We had reached Pall Mall as we talked, and were walking down it from
     the St. James's end.  Sherlock Holmes stopped at a door some little
     distance from the Carlton, and, cautioning me not to speak, he led
     the way into the hall.  Through the glass paneling I caught a glimpse
     of a large and luxurious room, in which a considerable number of men
     were sitting about and reading papers, each in his own little nook. 
     Holmes showed me into a small chamber which looked out into Pall
     Mall, and then, leaving me for a minute, he came back with a
     companion whom I knew could only be his brother.

     Mycroft Holmes was a much larger and stouter man than Sherlock.  His
     body was absolutely corpulent, but his face, though massive, had
     preserved something of the sharpness of expression which was so
     remarkable in that of his brother.  His eyes, which were of a
     peculiarly light, watery gray, seemed to always retain that far-away,
     introspective look which I had only observed in Sherlock's when he
     was exerting his full powers.

     "I am glad to meet you, sir," said he, putting out a broad, fat hand
     like the flipper of a seal.  "I hear of Sherlock everywhere since you
     became his chronicler.  By the way, Sherlock, I expected to see you
     round last week, to consult me over that Manor House case.  I thought
     you might be a little out of your depth."

     "No, I solved it," said my friend, smiling.

     "It was Adams, of course."

     "Yes, it was Adams."

     "I was sure of it from the first."  The two sat down together in the
     bow-window of the club.  "To any one who wishes to study mankind this
     is the spot," said Mycroft.  "Look at the magnificent types!  Look at
     these two men who are coming towards us, for example."

     "The billiard-marker and the other?"

     "Precisely.  What do you make of the other?"

     The two men had stopped opposite the window.  Some chalk marks over
     the waistcoat pocket were the only signs of billiards which I could
     see in one of them.  The other was a very small, dark fellow, with
     his hat pushed back and several packages under his arm.

     "An old soldier, I perceive," said Sherlock.

     "And very recently discharged," remarked the brother.

     "Served in India, I see."

     "And a non-commissioned officer."

     "Royal Artillery, I fancy," said Sherlock.

     "And a widower."

     "But with a child."

     "Children, my dear boy, children."

     "Come," said I, laughing, "this is a little too much."

     "Surely," answered Holmes, "it is not hard to say that a man with
     that bearing, expression of authority, and sunbaked skin, is a
     soldier, is more than a private, and is not long from India."

     "That he has not left the service long is shown by his still wearing
     is ammunition boots, as they are called," observed Mycroft.

     "He had not the cavalry stride, yet he wore his hat on one side, as
     is shown by the lighter skin of that side of his brow.  His weight is
     against his being a sapper.  He is in the artillery."

     "Then, of course, his complete mourning shows that he has lost some
     one very dear.  The fact that he is doing his own shopping looks as
     though it were his wife.  He has been buying things for children, you
     perceive.  There is a rattle, which shows that one of them is very
     young.  The wife probably died in childbed.  The fact that he has a
     picture-book under his arm shows that there is another child to be
     thought of."

     I began to understand what my friend meant when he said that his
     brother possessed even keener faculties that he did himself.  He
     glanced across at me and smiled.  Mycroft took snuff from a
     tortoise-shell box, and brushed away the wandering grains from his
     coat front with a large, red silk handkerchief.

     "By the way, Sherlock," said he, "I have had something quite after
     your own heart--a most singular problem--submitted to my judgment.  I
     really had not the energy to follow it up save in a very incomplete
     fashion, but it gave me a basis for some pleasing speculation.  If
     you would care to hear the facts--"

     "My dear Mycroft, I should be delighted."

     The brother scribbled a note upon a leaf of his pocket-book, and,
     ringing the bell, he handed it to the waiter.

     "I have asked Mr. Melas to step across," said he.  "He lodges on the
     floor above me, and I have some slight acquaintance with him, which
     led him to come to me in his perplexity.  Mr. Melas is a Greek by
     extraction, as I understand, and he is a remarkable linguist.  He
     earns his living partly as interpreter in the law courts and partly
     by acting as guide to any wealthy Orientals who may visit the
     Northumberland Avenue hotels.  I think I will leave him to tell his
     very remarkable experience in his own fashion."

     A few minutes later we were joined by a short, stout man whose olive
     face and coal-black hair proclaimed his Southern origin, though his
     speech was that of an educated Englishman.  He shook hands eagerly
     with Sherlock Holmes, and his dark eyes sparkled with pleasure when
     he understood that the specialist was anxious to hear his story.

     "I do not believe that the police credit me--on my word, I do not,"
     said he in a wailing voice.  "Just because they have never heard of
     it before, they think that such a thing cannot be.  But I know that I
     shall never be easy in my mind until I know what has become of my
     poor man with the sticking-plaster upon his face."

     "I am all attention," said Sherlock Holmes.

     "This is Wednesday evening," said Mr. Melas.  "Well then, it was
     Monday night--only two days ago, you understand--that all this
     happened.  I am an interpreter, as perhaps my neighbor there has told
     you.  I interpret all languages--or nearly all--but as I am a Greek
     by birth and with a Grecian name, it is with that particular tongue
     that I am principally associated.  For many years I have been the
     chief Greek interpreter in London, and my name is very well known in
     the hotels.

     It happens not unfrequently that I am sent for at strange hours by
     foreigners who get into difficulties, or by travelers who arrive late
     and wish my services.  I was not surprised, therefore, on Monday
     night when a Mr. Latimer, a very fashionably dressed young man, came
     up to my rooms and asked me to accompany him in a cab which was
     waiting at the door.  A Greek friend had come to see him upon
     business, he said, and as he could speak nothing but his own tongue,
     the services of an interpreter were indispensable.  He gave me to
     understand that his house was some little distance off, in
     Kensington, and he seemed to be in a great hurry, bustling me rapidly
     into the cab when we had descended to the street.

     "I say into the cab, but I soon became doubtful as to whether it was
     not a carriage in which I found myself.  It was certainly more roomy
     than the ordinary four-wheeled disgrace to London, and the fittings,
     though frayed, were of rich quality.  Mr. Latimer seated himself
     opposite to me and we started off through Charing Cross and up the
     Shaftesbury Avenue.  We had come out upon Oxford Street and I had
     ventured some remark as to this being a roundabout way to Kensington,
     when my words were arrested by the extraordinary conduct of my
     companion.

     "He began by drawing a most formidable-looking bludgeon loaded with
     lead from his pocket, and switching it backward and forward several
     times, as if to test its weight and strength.  Then he placed it
     without a word upon the seat beside him.  Having done this, he drew
     up the windows on each side, and I found to my astonishment that they
     were covered with paper so as to prevent my seeing through them.

     "'I am sorry to cut off your view, Mr. Melas,' said he.  'The fact is
     that I have no intention that you should see what the place is to
     which we are driving.  It might possibly be inconvenient to me if you
     could find your way there again.'

     "As you can imagine, I was utterly taken aback by such an address. 
     My companion was a powerful, broad-shouldered young fellow, and,
     apart from the weapon, I should not have had the slightest chance in
     a struggle with him.

     "'This is very extraordinary conduct, Mr. Latimer,' I stammered. 
     'You must be aware that what you are doing is quite illegal.'

     "'It is somewhat of a liberty, no doubt,' said he, 'but we'll make it
     up to you.  I must warn you, however, Mr. Melas, that if at any time
     to-night you attempt to raise an alarm or do anything which is
     against my interests, you will find it a very serious thing.  I beg
     you to remember that no one knows where you are, and that, whether
     you are in this carriage or in my house, you are equally in my
     power.'

     "His words were quiet, but he had a rasping way of saying them which
     was very menacing.  I sat in silence wondering what on earth could be
     his reason for kidnapping me in this extraordinary fashion.  Whatever
     it might be, it was perfectly clear that there was no possible use in
     my resisting, and that I could only wait to see what might befall.

     "For nearly two hours we drove without my having the least clue as to
     where we were going.  Sometimes the rattle of the stones told of a
     paved causeway, and at others our smooth, silent course suggested
     asphalt; but, save by this variation in sound, there was nothing at
     all which could in the remotest way help me to form a guess as to
     where we were.  The paper over each window was impenetrable to light,
     and a blue curtain was drawn across the glass work in front.  It was
     a quarter-past seven when we left Pall Mall, and my watch showed me
     that it was ten minutes to nine when we at last came to a standstill.
      My companion let down the window, and I caught a glimpse of a low,
     arched doorway with a lamp burning above it.  As I was hurried from
     the carriage it swung open, and I found myself inside the house, with
     a vague impression of a lawn and trees on each side of me as I
     entered.  Whether these were private grounds, however, or bona-fide
     country was more than I could possibly venture to say.

     "There was a colored gas-lamp inside which was turned so low that I
     could see little save that the hall was of some size and hung with
     pictures.  In the dim light I could make out that the person who had
     opened the door was a small, mean-looking, middle-aged man with
     rounded shoulders.  As he turned towards us the glint of the light
     showed me that he was wearing glasses.

     "'Is this Mr. Melas, Harold?' said he.

     "'Yes.'

     "'Well done, well done!  No ill-will, Mr. Melas, I hope, but we could
     not get on without you.  If you deal fair with us you'll not regret
     it, but if you try any tricks, God help you!'  He spoke in a nervous,
     jerky fashion, and with little giggling laughs in between, but
     somehow he impressed me with fear more than the other.

     "'What do you want with me?' I asked.

     "'Only to ask a few questions of a Greek gentleman who is visiting
     us, and to let us have the answers.  But say no more than you are
     told to say, or--' here came the nervous giggle again--'you had
     better never have been born.'

     "As he spoke he opened a door and showed the way into a room which
     appeared to be very richly furnished, but again the only light was
     afforded by a single lamp half-turned down.  The chamber was
     certainly large, and the way in which my feet sank into the carpet as
     I stepped across it told me of its richness.  I caught glimpses of
     velvet chairs, a high white marble mantel-piece, and what seemed to
     be a suit of Japanese armor at one side of it.  There was a chair
     just under the lamp, and the elderly man motioned that I should sit
     in it.  The younger had left us, but he suddenly returned through
     another door, leading with him a gentleman clad in some sort of loose
     dressing-gown who moved slowly towards us.  As he came into the
     circle of dim light which enables me to see him more clearly I was
     thrilled with horror at his appearance.  He was deadly pale and
     terribly emaciated, with the protruding, brilliant eyes of a man
     whose spirit was greater than his strength.  But what shocked me more
     than any signs of physical weakness was that his face was grotesquely
     criss-crossed with sticking-plaster, and that one large pad of it was
     fastened over his mouth.

     "'Have you the slate, Harold?' cried the older man, as this strange
     being fell rather than sat down into a chair.  'Are his hands loose? 
     Now, then, give him the pencil.  You are to ask the questions, Mr.
     Melas, and he will write the answers.  Ask him first of all whether
     he is prepared to sign the papers?'

     "The man's eyes flashed fire.

     "'Never!' he wrote in Greek upon the slate.

     "'On no condition?' I asked, at the bidding of our tyrant.

     "'Only if I see her married in my presence by a Greek priest whom I
     know.'

     "The man giggled in his venomous way.

     "'You know what awaits you, then?'

     "'I care nothing for myself.'

     "These are samples of the questions and answers which made up our
     strange half-spoken, half-written conversation.  Again and again I
     had to ask him whether he would give in and sign the documents. 
     Again and again I had the same indignant reply.  But soon a happy
     thought came to me.  I took to adding on little sentences of my own
     to each question, innocent ones at first, to test whether either of
     our companions knew anything of the matter, and then, as I found that
     they showed no signs I played a more dangerous game.  Our
     conversation ran something like this:

     "'You can do no good by this obstinacy. Who are you?'

     "'I care not. I am a stranger in London.'

     "'Your fate will be upon your own head. How long have you been here?'

     "'Let it be so. Three weeks.'

     "'The property can never be yours. What ails you?'

     "'It shall not go to villains. They are starving me.'

     "'You shall go free if you sign. What house is this?'

     "'I will never sign. I do not know.'

     "'You are not doing her any service. What is your name?'

     "'Let me hear her say so. Kratides.'

     "'You shall see her if you sign. Where are you from?'

     "'Then I shall never see her. Athens.'

     "Another five minutes, Mr. Holmes, and I should have wormed out the
     whole story under their very noses.  My very next question might have
     cleared the matter up, but at that instant the door opened and a
     woman stepped into the room.  I could not see her clearly enough to
     know more than that she was tall and graceful, with black hair, and
     clad in some sort of loose white gown.

     "'Harold,' said she, speaking English with a broken accent.  'I could
     not stay away longer.  It is so lonely up there with only--Oh, my
     God, it is Paul!'

     "These last words were in Greek, and at the same instant the man with
     a convulsive effort tore the plaster from his lips, and screaming out
     'Sophy!  Sophy!' rushed into the woman's arms.  Their embrace was but
     for an instant, however, for the younger man seized the woman and
     pushed her out of the room, while the elder easily overpowered his
     emaciated victim, and dragged him away through the other door.  For a
     moment I was left alone in the room, and I sprang to my feet with
     some vague idea that I might in some way get a clue to what this
     house was in which I found myself.  Fortunately, however, I took no
     steps, for looking up I saw that the older man was standing in the
     door-way with his eyes fixed upon me.

     "'That will do, Mr. Melas,' said he.  'You perceive that we have
     taken you into our confidence over some very private business.  We
     should not have troubled you, only that our friend who speaks Greek
     and who began these negotiations has been forced to return to the
     East.  It was quite necessary for us to find some one to take his
     place, and we were fortunate in hearing of your powers.'

     "I bowed.

     "'There are five sovereigns here,' said he, walking up to me, 'which
     will, I hope, be a sufficient fee.  But remember,' he added, tapping
     me lightly on the chest and giggling, 'if you speak to a human soul
     about this--one human soul, mind--well, may God have mercy upon your
     soul!'

     "I cannot tell you the loathing and horror with which this
     insignificant-looking man inspired me.  I could see him better now as
     the lamp-light shone upon him.  His features were peaky and sallow,
     and his little pointed beard was thready and ill-nourished.  He
     pushed his face forward as he spoke and his lips and eyelids were
     continually twitching like a man with St. Vitus's dance.  I could not
     help thinking that his strange, catchy little laugh was also a
     symptom of some nervous malady.  The terror of his face lay in his
     eyes, however, steel gray, and glistening coldly with a malignant,
     inexorable cruelty in their depths.

     "'We shall know if you speak of this,' said he.  'We have our own
     means of information.  Now you will find the carriage waiting, and my
     friend will see you on your way.'

     "I was hurried through the hall and into the vehicle, again obtaining
     that momentary glimpse of trees and a garden.  Mr. Latimer followed
     closely at my heels, and took his place opposite to me without a
     word.  In silence we again drove for an interminable distance with
     the windows raised, until at last, just after midnight, the carriage
     pulled up.

     "'You will get down here, Mr. Melas,' said my companion.  'I am sorry
     to leave you so far from your house, but there is no alternative. 
     Any attempt upon your part to follow the carriage can only end in
     injury to yourself.'

     "He opened the door as he spoke, and I had hardly time to spring out
     when the coachman lashed the horse and the carriage rattled away.  I
     looked around me in astonishment.  I was on some sort of a heathy
     common mottled over with dark clumps of furze-bushes.  Far away
     stretched a line of houses, with a light here and there in the upper
     windows.  On the other side I saw the red signal-lamps of a railway.

     "The carriage which had brought me was already out of sight.  I stood
     gazing round and wondering where on earth I might be, when I saw some
     one coming towards me in the darkness.  As he came up to me I made
     out that he was a railway porter.

     "'Can you tell me what place this is?' I asked.

     "'Wandsworth Common,' said he.

     "'Can I get a train into town?'

     "'If you walk on a mile or so to Clapham Junction,' said he, 'you'll
     just be in time for the last to Victoria.'

     "So that was the end of my adventure, Mr. Holmes.  I do not know
     where I was, nor whom I spoke with, nor anything save what I have
     told you.  But I know that there is foul play going on, and I want to
     help that unhappy man if I can.  I told the whole story to Mr.
     Mycroft Holmes next morning, and subsequently to the police."

     We all sat in silence for some little time after listening to this
     extraordinary narrative.  Then Sherlock looked across at his brother.

     "Any steps?" he asked.

     Mycroft picked up the Daily News, which was lying on the side-table.

     "Anybody supplying any information as to the whereabouts of a Greek
     gentleman named Paul Kratides, from Athens, who is unable to speak
     English, will be rewarded.  A similar reward paid to any one giving
     information about a Greek lady whose first name is Sophy. X 2473.

     "That was in all the dailies.  No answer."

     "How about the Greek Legation?"

     "I have inquired.  They know nothing."

     "A wire to the head of the Athens police, then?"

     "Sherlock has all the energy of the family," said Mycroft, turning to
     me.  "Well, you take the case up by all means, and let me know if you
     do any good."

     "Certainly," answered my friend, rising from his chair.  "I'll let
     you know, and Mr. Melas also.  In the meantime, Mr. Melas, I should
     certainly be on my guard, if I were you, for of course they must know
     through these advertisements that you have betrayed them."

     As we walked home together, Holmes stopped at a telegraph office and
     sent off several wires.

     "You see, Watson," he remarked, "our evening has been by no means
     wasted.  Some of my most interesting cases have come to me in this
     way through Mycroft.  The problem which we have just listened to,
     although it can admit of but one explanation, has still some
     distinguishing features."

     "You have hopes of solving it?"

     "Well, knowing as much as we do, it will be singular indeed if we
     fail to discover the rest.  You must yourself have formed some theory
     which will explain the facts to which we have listened."

     "In a vague way, yes."

     "What was your idea, then?"

     "It seemed to me to be obvious that this Greek girl had been carried
     off by the young Englishman named Harold Latimer."

     "Carried off from where?"

     "Athens, perhaps."

     Sherlock Holmes shook his head.  "This young man could not talk a
     word of Greek.  The lady could talk English fairly well. 
     Inference--that she had been in England some little time, but he had
     not been in Greece."

     "Well, then, we will presume that she had come on a visit to England,
     and that this Harold had persuaded her to fly with him."

     "That is more probable."

     "Then the brother--for that, I fancy, must be the relationship--comes
     over from Greece to interfere.  He imprudently puts himself into the
     power of the young man and his older associate.  They seize him and
     use violence towards him in order to make him sign some papers to
     make over the girl's fortune--of which he may be trustee--to them. 
     This he refuses to do.  In order to negotiate with him they have to
     get an interpreter, and they pitch upon this Mr. Melas, having used
     some other one before.  The girl is not told of the arrival of her
     brother, and finds it out by the merest accident."

     "Excellent, Watson!" cried Holmes.  "I really fancy that you are not
     far from the truth.  You see that we hold all the cards, and we have
     only to fear some sudden act of violence on their part.  If they give
     us time we must have them."

     "But how can we find where this house lies?"

     "Well, if our conjecture is correct and the girl's name is or was
     Sophy Kratides, we should have no difficulty in tracing her.  That
     must be our main hope, for the brother is, of course, a complete
     stranger.  It is clear that some time has elapsed since this Harold
     established these relations with the girl--some weeks, at any
     rate--since the brother in Greece has had time to hear of it and come
     across.  If they have been living in the same place during this time,
     it is probable that we shall have some answer to Mycroft's
     advertisement."

     We had reached our house in Baker Street while we had been talking. 
     Holmes ascended the stair first, and as he opened the door of our
     room he gave a start of surprise.  Looking over his shoulder, I was
     equally astonished.  His brother Mycroft was sitting smoking in the
     arm-chair.

     "Come in, Sherlock!  Come in, sir," said he blandly, smiling at our
     surprised faces.  "You don't expect such energy from me, do you,
     Sherlock?  But somehow this case attracts me."

     "How did you get here?"

     "I passed you in a hansom."

     "There has been some new development?"

     "I had an answer to my advertisement."

     "Ah!"

     "Yes, it came within a few minutes of your leaving."

     "And to what effect?"

     Mycroft Holmes took out a sheet of paper.

     "Here it is," said he, "written with a J pen on royal cream paper by
     a middle-aged man with a weak constitution.

     "Sir [he says]:
     "In answer to your advertisement of to-day's date, I beg to inform
     you that I know the young lady in question very well.  If you should
     care to call upon me I could give you some particulars as to her
     painful history.  She is living at present at The Myrtles, Beckenham.
     "Yours faithfully,
     "J. Davenport.

     "He writes from Lower Brixton," said Mycroft Holmes.  "Do you not
     think that we might drive to him now, Sherlock, and learn these
     particulars?"

     "My dear Mycroft, the brother's life is more valuable than the
     sister's story.  I think we should call at Scotland Yard for
     Inspector Gregson, and go straight out to Beckenham.  We know that a
     man is being done to death, and every hour may be vital."

     "Better pick up Mr. Melas on our way," I suggested.  "We may need an
     interpreter."

     "Excellent," said Sherlock Holmes.  "Send the boy for a four-wheeler,
     and we shall be off at once."  He opened the table-drawer as he
     spoke, and I noticed that he slipped his revolver into his pocket. 
     "Yes," said he, in answer to my glance; "I should say from what we
     have heard, that we are dealing with a particularly dangerous gang."

     It was almost dark before we found ourselves in Pall Mall, at the
     rooms of Mr. Melas.  A gentleman had just called for him, and he was
     gone.

     "Can you tell me where?" asked Mycroft Holmes.

     "I don't know, sir," answered the woman who had opened the door; "I
     only know that he drove away with the gentleman in a carriage."

     "Did the gentleman give a name?"

     "No, sir."

     "He wasn't a tall, handsome, dark young man?"

     "Oh, no, sir.  He was a little gentleman, with glasses, thin in the
     face, but very pleasant in his ways, for he was laughing al the time
     that he was talking."

     "Come along!" cried Sherlock Holmes, abruptly.  "This grows serious,"
     he observed, as we drove to Scotland Yard.  "These men have got hold
     of Melas again.  He is a man of no physical courage, as they are well
     aware from their experience the other night.  This villain was able
     to terrorize him the instant that he got into his presence.  No doubt
     they want his professional services, but, having used him, they may
     be inclined to punish him for what they will regard as his
     treachery."

     Our hope was that, by taking train, we might get to Beckenham as soon
     or sooner than the carriage.  On reaching Scotland Yard, however, it
     was more than an hour before we could get Inspector Gregson and
     comply with the legal formalities which would enable us to enter the
     house.  It was a quarter to ten before we reached London Bridge, and
     half past before the four of us alighted on the Beckenham platform. 
     A drive of half a mile brought us to The Myrtles--a large, dark house
     standing back from the road in its own grounds.  Here we dismissed
     our cab, and made our way up the drive together.

     "The windows are all dark," remarked the inspector.  "The house seems
     deserted."

     "Our birds are flown and the nest empty," said Holmes.

     "Why do you say so?"

     "A carriage heavily loaded with luggage has passed out during the
     last hour."

     The inspector laughed.  "I saw the wheel-tracks in the light of the
     gate-lamp, but where does the luggage come in?"

     "You may have observed the same wheel-tracks going the other way. 
     But the outward-bound ones were very much deeper--so much so that we
     can say for a certainty that there was a very considerable weight on
     the carriage."

     "You get a trifle beyond me there," said the inspector, shrugging his
     shoulder.  "It will not be an easy door to force, but we will try if
     we cannot make some one hear us."

     He hammered loudly at the knocker and pulled at the bell, but without
     any success.  Holmes had slipped away, but he came back in a few
     minutes.

     "I have a window open," said he.

     "It is a mercy that you are on the side of the force, and not against
     it, Mr. Holmes," remarked the inspector, as he noted the clever way
     in which my friend had forced back the catch.  "Well, I think that
     under the circumstances we may enter without an invitation."

     One after the other we made our way into a large apartment, which was
     evidently that in which Mr. Melas had found himself.  The inspector
     had lit his lantern, and by its light we could see the two doors, the
     curtain, the lamp, and the suit of Japanese mail as he had described
     them.  On the table lay two glasses, and empty brandy-bottle, and the
     remains of a meal.

     "What is that?" asked Holmes, suddenly.

     We all stood still and listened.  A low moaning sound was coming from
     somewhere over our heads.  Holmes rushed to the door and out into the
     hall.  The dismal noise came from upstairs.  He dashed up, the
     inspector and I at his heels, while his brother Mycroft followed as
     quickly as his great bulk would permit.

     Three doors faced up upon the second floor, and it was from the
     central of these that the sinister sounds were issuing, sinking
     sometimes into a dull mumble and rising again into a shrill whine. 
     It was locked, but the key had been left on the outside.  Holmes
     flung open the door and rushed in, but he was out again in an
     instant, with his hand to his throat.

     "It's charcoal," he cried.  "Give it time.  It will clear."

     Peering in, we could see that the only light in the room came from a
     dull blue flame which flickered from a small brass tripod in the
     centre.  It threw a livid, unnatural circle upon the floor, while in
     the shadows beyond we saw the vague loom of two figures which
     crouched against the wall.  From the open door there reeked a
     horrible poisonous exhalation which set us gasping and coughing. 
     Holmes rushed to the top of the stairs to draw in the fresh air, and
     then, dashing into the room, he threw up the window and hurled the
     brazen tripod out into the garden.

     "We can enter in a minute," he gasped, darting out again.  "Where is
     a candle?  I doubt if we could strike a match in that atmosphere. 
     Hold the light at the door and we shall get them out, Mycroft, now!"

     With a rush we got to the poisoned men and dragged them out into the
     well-lit hall.  Both of them were blue-lipped and insensible, with
     swollen, congested faces and protruding eyes.  Indeed, so distorted
     were their features that, save for his black beard and stout figure,
     we might have failed to recognize in one of them the Greek
     interpreter who had parted from us only a few hours before at the
     Diogenes Club.  His hands and feet were securely strapped together,
     and he bore over one eye the marks of a violent blow.  The other, who
     was secured in a similar fashion, was a tall man in the last stage of
     emaciation, with several strips of sticking-plaster arranged in a
     grotesque pattern over his face.  He had ceased to moan as we laid
     him down, and a glance showed me that for him at least our aid had
     come too late.  Mr. Melas, however, still lived, and in less than an
     hour, with the aid of ammonia and brandy I had the satisfaction of
     seeing him open his eyes, and of knowing that my hand had drawn him
     back from that dark valley in which all paths meet.

     It was a simple story which he had to tell, and one which did but
     confirm our own deductions.  His visitor, on entering his rooms, had
     drawn a life-preserver from his sleeve, and had so impressed him with
     the fear of instant and inevitable death that he had kidnapped him
     for the second time.  Indeed, it was almost mesmeric, the effect
     which this giggling ruffian had produced upon the unfortunate
     linguist, for he could not speak of him save with trembling hands and
     a blanched cheek.  He had been taken swiftly to Beckenham, and had
     acted as interpreter in a second interview, even more dramatic than
     the first, in which the two Englishmen had menaced their prisoner
     with instant death if he did not comply with their demands.  Finally,
     finding him proof against every threat, they had hurled him back into
     his prison, and after reproaching Melas with his treachery, which
     appeared from the newspaper advertisement, they had stunned him with
     a blow from a stick, and he remembered nothing more until he found us
     bending over him.

     And this was the singular case of the Grecian Interpreter, the
     explanation of which is still involved in some mystery.  We were able
     to find out, by communicating with the gentleman who had answered the
     advertisement, that the unfortunate young lady came of a wealthy
     Grecian family, and that she had been on a visit to some friends in
     England.  While there she had met a young man named Harold Latimer,
     who had acquired an ascendancy over her and had eventually persuaded
     her to fly with him.  Her friends, shocked at the event, had
     contented themselves with informing her brother at Athens, and had
     then washed their hands of the matter.  The brother, on his arrival
     in England, had imprudently placed himself in the power of Latimer
     and of his associate, whose name was Wilson Kemp--a man of the
     foulest antecedents. These two, finding that  through his ignorance
     of the language he was helpless in their hands, had kept him a
     prisoner, and had endeavored by cruelty and starvation to make him
     sign away his own and his sister's property.  They had kept him in
     the house without the girl's knowledge, and the plaster over the face
     had been for the purpose of making recognition difficult in case she
     should ever catch a glimpse of him.  Her feminine perception,
     however, had instantly seen through the disguise when, on the
     occasion of the interpreter's visit, she had seen him for the first
     time.  The poor girl, however, was herself a prisoner, for there was
     no one about the house except the man who acted as coachman, and his
     wife, both of whom were tools of the conspirators.  Finding that
     their secret was out, and that their prisoner was not to be coerced,
     the two villains with the girl had fled away at a few hours' notice
     from the furnished house which they had hired, having first, as they
     thought, taken vengeance both upon the man who had defied and the one
     who had betrayed them.

     Months afterwards a curious newspaper cutting reached us from
     Buda-Pesth.  It told how two Englishmen who had been traveling with a
     woman had met with a tragic end.  They had each been stabbed, it
     seems, and the Hungarian police were of opinion that they had
     quarreled and had inflicted mortal injuries upon each other.  Holmes,
     however, is, I fancy, of a different way of thinking, and holds to
     this day that, if one could find the Grecian girl, one might learn
     how the wrongs of herself and her brother came to be avenged.






                                THE NAVAL TREATY

     The July which immediately succeeded my marriage was made memorable
     by three cases of interest, in which I had the privilege of being
     associated with Sherlock Holmes and of studying his methods. I find
     them recorded in my notes under the headings of "The Adventure of the
     Second Stain," "The Adventure of the Naval Treaty," and "The
     Adventure of the Tired Captain." The first of these, however, deals
     with interest of such importance and implicates so many of the first
     families in the kingdom that for many years it will be impossible to
     make it public. No case, however, in which Holmes was engaged has
     ever illustrated the value of his analytical methods so clearly or
     has impressed those who were associated with him so deeply. I still
     retain an almost verbatim report of the interview in which he
     demonstrated the true facts of the case to Monsieur Dubugue of the
     Paris police, and Fritz von Waldbaum, the well-known specialist of
     Dantzig, both of whom had wasted their energies upon what proved to
     be side-issues. The new century will have come, however, before the
     story can be safely told. Meanwhile I pass on to the second on my
     list, which promised also at one time to be of national importance,
     and was marked by several incidents which give it a quite unique
     character.

     During my school-days I had been intimately associated with a lad
     named Percy Phelps, who was of much the same age as myself, though he
     was two classes ahead of me. He was a very brilliant boy, and carried
     away every prize which the school had to offer, finished his exploits
     by winning a scholarship which sent him on to continue his triumphant
     career at Cambridge. He was, I remember, extremely well connected,
     and even when we were all little boys together we knew that his
     mother's brother was Lord Holdhurst, the great conservative
     politician. This gaudy relationship did him little good at school. On
     the contrary, it seemed rather a piquant thing to us to chevy him
     about the playground and hit him over the shins with a wicket. But it
     was another thing when he came out into the world. I heard vaguely
     that his abilities and the influences which he commanded had won him
     a good position at the Foreign Office, and then he passed completely
     out of my mind until the following letter recalled his existence:

     Briarbrae, Woking.
     My dear Watson:
     I have no doubt that you can remember "Tadpole" Phelps, who was in
     the fifth form when you were in the third. It is possible even that
     you may have heard that through my uncle's influence I obtained a
     good appointment at the Foreign Office, and that I was in a situation
     of trust and honor until a horrible misfortune came suddenly to blast
     my career.
     There is no use writing of the details of that dreadful event. In the
     event of your acceding to my request it is probably that I shall have
     to narrate them to you. I have only just recovered from nine weeks of
     brain-fever, and am still exceedingly weak. Do you think that you
     could bring your friend Mr. Holmes down to see me? I should like to
     have his opinion of the case, though the authorities assure me that
     nothing more can be done. Do try to bring him down, and as soon as
     possible. Every minute seems an hour while I live in this state of
     horrible suspense. Assure him that if I have not asked his advice
     sooner it was not because I did not appreciate his talents, but
     because I have been off my head ever since the blow fell. Now I am
     clear again, though I dare not think of it too much for fear of a
     relapse. I am still so weak that I have to write, as you see, by
     dictating. Do try to bring him.
     Your old school-fellow,
     Percy Phelps.

     There was something that touched me as I read this letter, something
     pitiable in the reiterated appeals to bring Holmes. So moved was I
     that even had it been a difficult matter I should have tried it, but
     of course I knew well that Holmes loved his art, so that he was ever
     as ready to bring his aid as his client could be to receive it. My
     wife agreed with me that not a moment should be lost in laying the
     matter before him, and so within an hour of breakfast-time I found
     myself back once more in the old rooms in Baker Street.

     Holmes was seated at his side-table clad in his dressing-gown, and
     working hard over a chemical investigation. A large curved retort was
     boiling furiously in the bluish flame of a Bunsen burner, and the
     distilled drops were condensing into a two-litre measure. My friend
     hardly glanced up as I entered, and I, seeing that his investigation
     must be of importance, seated myself in an arm-chair and waited. He
     dipped into this bottle or that, drawing out a few drops of each with
     his glass pipette, and finally brought a test-tube containing a
     solution over to the table. In his right hand he held a slip of
     litmus-paper.

     "You come at a crisis, Watson," said he. "If this paper remains blue,
     all is well. If it turns red, it means a man's life." He dipped it
     into the test-tube and it flushed at once into a dull, dirty crimson.
     "Hum! I thought as much!" he cried. "I will be at your service in an
     instant, Watson. You will find tobacco in the Persian slipper." He
     turned to his desk and scribbled off several telegrams, which were
     handed over to the page-boy. Then he threw himself down into the
     chair opposite, and drew up his knees until his fingers clasped round
     his long, thin shins.

     "A very commonplace little murder," said he. "You've got something
     better, I fancy. You are the stormy petrel of crime, Watson. What is
     it?"

     I handed him the letter, which he read with the most concentrated
     attention.

     "It does not tell us very much, does it?" he remarked, as he handed
     it back to me.

     "Hardly anything."

     "And yet the writing is of interest."

     "But the writing is not his own."

     "Precisely. It is a woman's."

     "A man's surely," I cried.

     "No, a woman's, and a woman of rare character. You see, at the
     commencement of an investigation it is something to know that your
     client is in close contact with some one who, for good or evil, has
     an exceptional nature. My interest is already awakened in the case.
     If you are ready we will start at once for Woking, and see this
     diplomatist who is in such evil case, and the lady to whom he
     dictates his letters."

     We were fortunate enough to catch an early train at Waterloo, and in
     a little under an hour we found ourselves among the fir-woods and the
     heather of Woking. Briarbrae proved to be a large detached house
     standing in extensive grounds within a few minutes' walk of the
     station. On sending in our cards we were shown into an elegantly
     appointed drawing-room, where we were joined in a few minutes by a
     rather stout man who received us with much hospitality. His age may
     have been nearer forty than thirty, but his cheeks were so ruddy and
     his eyes so merry that he still conveyed the impression of a plump
     and mischievous boy.

     "I am so glad that you have come," said he, shaking our hands with
     effusion. "Percy has been inquiring for you all morning. Ah, poor old
     chap, he clings to any straw! His father and his mother asked me to
     see you, for the mere mention of the subject is very painful to
     them."

     "We have had no details yet," observed Holmes. "I perceive that you
     are not yourself a member of the family."

     Our acquaintance looked surprised, and then, glancing down, he began
     to laugh.

     "Of course you saw the J H monogram on my locket," said he. "For a
     moment I thought you had done something clever. Joseph Harrison is my
     name, and as Percy is to marry my sister Annie I shall at least be a
     relation by marriage. You will find my sister in his room, for she
     has nursed him hand-and-foot this two months back. Perhaps we'd
     better go in at once, for I know how impatient he is."

     The chamber in which we were shown was on the same floor as the
     drawing-room. It was furnished partly as a sitting and partly as a
     bedroom, with flowers arranged daintily in every nook and corner. A
     young man, very pale and worn, was lying upon a sofa near the open
     window, through which came the rich scent of the garden and the balmy
     summer air. A woman was sitting beside him, who rose as we entered.

     "Shall I leave, Percy?" she asked.

     He clutched her hand to detain her. "How are you, Watson?" said he,
     cordially. "I should never have known you under that moustache, and I
     dare say you would not be prepared to swear to me. This I presume is
     your celebrated friend, Mr. Sherlock Holmes?"

     I introduced him in a few words, and we both sat down. The stout
     young man had left us, but his sister still remained with her hand in
     that of the invalid. She was a striking-looking woman, a little short
     and thick for symmetry, but with a beautiful olive complexion, large,
     dark, Italian eyes, and a wealth of deep black hair. Her rich tints
     made the white face of her companion the more worn and haggard by the
     contrast.

     "I won't waste your time," said he, raising himself upon the sofa.
     "I'll plunge into the matter without further preamble. I was a happy
     and successful man, Mr. Holmes, and on the eve of being married, when
     a sudden and dreadful misfortune wrecked all my prospects in life.

     "I was, as Watson may have told you, in the Foreign Office, and
     through the influences of my uncle, Lord Holdhurst, I rose rapidly to
     a responsible position. When my uncle became foreign minister in this
     administration he gave me several missions of trust, and as I always
     brought them to a successful conclusion, he came at last to have the
     utmost confidence in my ability and tact.

     "Nearly ten weeks ago--to be more accurate, on the twenty-third of
     May--he called me into his private room, and, after complimenting me
     on the good work which I had done, he informed me that he had a new
     commission of trust for me to execute.

     "'This,' said he, taking a gray roll of paper from his bureau, 'is
     the original of that secret treaty between England and Italy of
     which, I regret to say, some rumors have already got into the public
     press. It is of enormous importance that nothing further should leak
     out. The French or the Russian embassy would pay an immense sum to
     learn the contents of these papers. They should not leave my bureau
     were it not that it is absolutely necessary to have them copied. You
     have a desk in your office?'

     "'Yes, sir.'

     "'Then take the treaty and lock it up there. I shall give directions
     that you may remain behind when the others go, so that you may copy
     it at your leisure without fear of being overlooked. When you have
     finished, relock both the original and the draft in the desk, and
     hand them over to me personally to-morrow morning.'

     "I took the papers and--"

     "Excuse me an instant," said Holmes. "Were you alone during this
     conversation?"

     "Absolutely."

     "In a large room?"

     "Thirty feet each way."

     "In the centre?"

     "Yes, about it."

     "And speaking low?"

     "My uncle's voice is always remarkably low. I hardly spoke at all."

     "Thank you," said Holmes, shutting his eyes; "pray go on."

     "I did exactly what he indicated, and waited until the other clerks
     had departed. One of them in my room, Charles Gorot, had some arrears
     of work to make up, so I left him there and went out to dine. When I
     returned he was gone. I was anxious to hurry my work, for I knew that
     Joseph--the Mr. Harrison whom you saw just now--was in town, and that
     he would travel down to Woking by the eleven-o'clock train, and I
     wanted if possible to catch it.

     "When I came to examine the treaty I saw at once that it was of such
     importance that my uncle had been guilty of no exaggeration in what
     he had said. Without going into details, I may say that it defined
     the position of Great Britain towards the Triple Alliance, and
     fore-shadowed the policy which this country would pursue in the event
     of the French fleet gaining a complete ascendancy over that of Italy
     in the Mediterranean. The questions treated in it were purely naval.
     At the end were the signatures of the high dignitaries who had signed
     it. I glanced my eyes over it, and then settled down to my task of
     copying.

     "It was a long document, written in the French language, and
     containing twenty-six separate articles. I copied as quickly as I
     could, but at nine o'clock I had only done nine articles, and it
     seemed hopeless for me to attempt to catch my train. I was feeling
     drowsy and stupid, partly from my dinner and also from the effects of
     a long day's work. A cup of coffee would clear my brain. A
     commissionaire remains all night in a little lodge at the foot of the
     stairs, and is in the habit of making coffee at his spirit-lamp for
     any of the officials who may be working over time. I rang the bell,
     therefore, to summon him.

     "To my surprise, it was a woman who answered the summons, a large,
     coarse-faced, elderly woman, in an apron. She explained that she was
     the commissionaire's wife, who did the charing, and I gave her the
     order for the coffee.

     "I wrote two more articles and then, feeling more drowsy than ever, I
     rose and walked up and down the room to stretch my legs. My coffee
     had not yet come, and I wondered what was the cause of the delay
     could be. Opening the door, I started down the corridor to find out.
     There was a straight passage, dimly lighted, which led from the room
     in which I had been working, and was the only exit from it. It ended
     in a curving staircase, with the commissionaire's lodge in the
     passage at the bottom. Half way down this staircase is a small
     landing, with another passage running into it at right angles. This
     second one leads by means of a second small stair to a side door,
     used by servants, and also as a short cut by clerks when coming from
     Charles Street. Here is a rough chart of the place."

     "Thank you. I think that I quite follow you," said Sherlock Holmes.

     "It is of the utmost importance that you should notice this point. I
     went down the stairs and into the hall, where I found the
     commissionaire fast asleep in his box, with the kettle boiling
     furiously upon the spirit-lamp. I took off the kettle and blew out
     the lamp, for the water was spurting over the floor. Then I put out
     my hand and was about to shake the man, who was still sleeping
     soundly, when a bell over his head rang loudly, and he woke with a
     start.

     "'Mr. Phelps, sir!' said he, looking at me in bewilderment.

     "'I came down to see if my coffee was ready.'

     "'I was boiling the kettle when I fell asleep, sir.' He looked at me
     and then up at the still quivering bell with an ever-growing
     astonishment upon his face.

     "'If you was here, sir, then who rang the bell?' he asked.

     "'The bell!' I cried. 'What bell is it?'

     "'It's the bell of the room you were working in.'

     "A cold hand seemed to close round my heart. Some one, then, was in
     that room where my precious treaty lay upon the table. I ran
     frantically up the stair and along the passage. There was no one in
     the corridors, Mr. Holmes. There was no one in the room. All was
     exactly as I left it, save only that the papers which had been
     committed to my care had been taken from the desk on which they lay.
     The copy was there, and the original was gone."

     Holmes sat up in his chair and rubbed his hands. I could see that the
     problem was entirely to his heart. "Pray, what did you do then?" he
     murmured.

     "I recognized in an instant that the thief must have come up the
     stairs from the side door. Of course I must have met him if he had
     come the other way."

     "You were satisfied that he could not have been concealed in the room
     all the time, or in the corridor which you have just described as
     dimly lighted?"

     "It is absolutely impossible. A rat could not conceal himself either
     in the room or the corridor. There is no cover at all."

     "Thank you. Pray proceed."

     "The commissionaire, seeing by my pale face that something was to be
     feared, had followed me upstairs. Now we both rushed along the
     corridor and down the steep steps which led to Charles Street. The
     door at the bottom was closed, but unlocked. We flung it open and
     rushed out. I can distinctly remember that as we did so there came
     three chimes from a neighboring clock. It was quarter to ten."

     "That is of enormous importance," said Holmes, making a note upon his
     shirt-cuff.

     "The night was very dark, and a thin, warm rain was falling. There
     was no one in Charles Street, but a great traffic was going on, as
     usual, in Whitehall, at the extremity. We rushed along the pavement,
     bare-headed as we were, and at the far corner we found a policeman
     standing.

     "'A robbery has been committed,' I gasped. 'A document of immense
     value has been stolen from the Foreign Office. Has any one passed
     this way?'

     "'I have been standing here for a quarter of an hour, sir,' said he;
     'only one person has passed during that time--a woman, tall and
     elderly, with a Paisley shawl.'

     "'Ah, that is only my wife,' cried the commissionaire; 'has no one
     else passed?'

     "'No one.'

     "'Then it must be the other way that the thief took,' cried the
     fellow, tugging at my sleeve.

     "But I was not satisfied, and the attempts which he made to draw me
     away increased my suspicions.

     "'Which way did the woman go?' I cried.

     "'I don't know, sir. I noticed her pass, but I had no special reason
     for watching her. She seemed to be in a hurry.'

     "'How long ago was it?'

     "'Oh, not very many minutes.'

     "'Within the last five?'

     "'Well, it could not be more than five.'

     "'You're only wasting your time, sir, and every minute now is of
     importance,' cried the commissionaire; 'take my word for it that my
     old woman has nothing to do with it, and come down to the other end
     of the street. Well, if you won't, I will.' And with that he rushed
     off in the other direction.

     "But I was after him in an instant and caught him by the sleeve.

     "'Where do you live?' said I.

     "'16 Ivy Lane, Brixton,' he answered. 'But don't let yourself be
     drawn away upon a false scent, Mr. Phelps. Come to the other end of
     the street and let us see if we can hear of anything.'

     "Nothing was to be lost by following his advice. With the policeman
     we both hurried down, but only to find the street full of traffic,
     many people coming and going, but all only too eager to get to a
     place of safety upon so wet a night. There was no lounger who could
     tell us who had passed.

     "Then we returned to the office, and searched the stairs and the
     passage without result. The corridor which led to the room was laid
     down with a kind of creamy linoleum which shows an impression very
     easily. We examined it very carefully, but found no outline of any
     footmark."

     "Had it been raining all evening?"

     "Since about seven."

     "How is it, then, that the woman who came into the room about nine
     left no traces with her muddy boots?"

     "I am glad you raised the point. It occurred to me at the time. The
     charwomen are in the habit of taking off their boots at the
     commissionaire's office, and putting on list slippers."

     "That is very clear. There were no marks, then, though the night was
     a wet one? The chain of events is certainly one of extraordinary
     interest. What did you do next?"

     "We examined the room also. There is no possibility of a secret door,
     and the windows are quite thirty feet from the ground. Both of them
     were fastened on the inside. The carpet prevents any possibility of a
     trap-door, and the ceiling is of the ordinary whitewashed kind. I
     will pledge my life that whoever stole my papers could only have come
     through the door."

     "How about the fireplace?"

     "They use none. There is a stove. The bell-rope hangs from the wire
     just to the right of my desk. Whoever rang it must have come right up
     to the desk to do it. But why should any criminal wish to ring the
     bell? It is a most insoluble mystery."

     "Certainly the incident was unusual. What were your next steps? You
     examined the room, I presume, to see if the intruder had left any
     traces--any cigar-end or dropped glove or hairpin or other trifle?"

     "There was nothing of the sort."

     "No smell?"

     "Well, we never thought of that."

     "Ah, a scent of tobacco would have been worth a great deal to us in
     such an investigation."

     "I never smoke myself, so I think I should have observed it if there
     had been any smell of tobacco. There was absolutely no clue of any
     kind. The only tangible fact was that the commissionaire's wife--Mrs.
     Tangey was the name--had hurried out of the place. He could give no
     explanation save that it was about the time when the woman always
     went home. The policeman and I agreed that our best plan would be to
     seize the woman before she could get rid of the papers, presuming
     that she had them.

     "The alarm had reached Scotland Yard by this time, and Mr. Forbes,
     the detective, came round at once and took up the case with a great
     deal of energy. We hired a hansom, and in half an hour we were at the
     address which had been given to us. A young woman opened the door,
     who proved to be Mrs. Tangey's eldest daughter. Her mother had not
     come back yet, and we were shown into the front room to wait.

     "About ten minutes later a knock came at the door, and here we made
     the one serious mistake for which I blame myself. Instead of opening
     the door ourselves, we allowed the girl to do so. We heard her say,
     'Mother, there are two men in the house waiting to see you,' and an
     instant afterwards we heard the patter of feet rushing down the
     passage. Forbes flung open the door, and we both ran into the back
     room or kitchen, but the woman had got there before us. She stared at
     us with defiant eyes, and then, suddenly recognizing me, an
     expression of absolute astonishment came over her face.

     "'Why, if it isn't Mr. Phelps, of the office!' she cried.

     "'Come, come, who did you think we were when you ran away from us?'
     asked my companion.

     "'I thought you were the brokers,' said she, 'we have had some
     trouble with a tradesman.'

     "'That's not quite good enough,' answered Forbes. 'We have reason to
     believe that you have taken a paper of importance from the Foreign
     Office, and that you ran in here to dispose of it. You must come back
     with us to Scotland Yard to be searched.'

     "It was in vain that she protested and resisted. A four-wheeler was
     brought, and we all three drove back in it. We had first made an
     examination of the kitchen, and especially of the kitchen fire, to
     see whether she might have made away with the papers during the
     instant that she was alone. There were no signs, however, of any
     ashes or scraps. When we reached Scotland Yard she was handed over at
     once to the female searcher. I waited in an agony of suspense until
     she came back with her report. There were no signs of the papers.

     "Then for the first time the horror of my situation came in its full
     force. Hitherto I had been acting, and action had numbed thought. I
     had been so confident of regaining the treaty at once that I had not
     dared to think of what would be the consequence if I failed to do so.
     But now there was nothing more to be done, and I had leisure to
     realize my position. It was horrible. Watson there would tell you
     that I was a nervous, sensitive boy at school. It is my nature. I
     thought of my uncle and of his colleagues in the Cabinet, of the
     shame which I had brought upon him, upon myself, upon every one
     connected with me. What though I was the victim of an extraordinary
     accident? No allowance is made for accidents where diplomatic
     interests are at stake. I was ruined, shamefully, hopelessly ruined.
     I don't know what I did. I fancy I must have made a scene. I have a
     dim recollection of a group of officials who crowded round me,
     endeavoring to soothe me. One of them drove down with me to Waterloo,
     and saw me into the Woking train. I believe that he would have come
     all the way had it not been that Dr. Ferrier, who lives near me, was
     going down by that very train. The doctor most kindly took charge of
     me, and it was well he did so, for I had a fit in the station, and
     before we reached home I was practically a raving maniac.

     "You can imagine the state of things here when they were roused from
     their beds by the doctor's ringing and found me in this condition.
     Poor Annie here and my mother were broken-hearted. Dr. Ferrier had
     just heard enough from the detective at the station to be able to
     give an idea of what had happened, and his story did not mend
     matters. It was evident to all that I was in for a long illness, so
     Joseph was bundled out of this cheery bedroom, and it was turned into
     a sick-room for me. Here I have lain, Mr. Holmes, for over nine
     weeks, unconscious, and raving with brain-fever. If it had not been
     for Miss Harrison here and for the doctor's care I should not be
     speaking to you now. She has nursed me by day and a hired nurse has
     looked after me by night, for in my mad fits I was capable of
     anything. Slowly my reason has cleared, but it is only during the
     last three days that my memory has quite returned. Sometimes I wish
     that it never had. The first thing that I did was to wire to Mr.
     Forbes, who had the case in hand. He came out, and assures me that,
     though everything has been done, no trace of a clue has been
     discovered. The commissionaire and his wife have been examined in
     every way without any light being thrown upon the matter. The
     suspicions of the police then rested upon young Gorot, who, as you
     may remember, stayed over time in the office that night. His
     remaining behind and his French name were really the only two points
     which could suggest suspicion; but, as a matter of fact, I did not
     begin work until he had gone, and his people are of Huguenot
     extraction, but as English in sympathy and tradition as you and I
     are. Nothing was found to implicate him in any way, and there the
     matter dropped. I turn to you, Mr. Holmes, as absolutely my last
     hope. If you fail me, then my honor as well as my position are
     forever forfeited."

     The invalid sank back upon his cushions, tired out by this long
     recital, while his nurse poured him out a glass of some stimulating
     medicine. Holmes sat silently, with his head thrown back and his eyes
     closed, in an attitude which might seem listless to a stranger, but
     which I knew betokened the most intense self-absorption.

     "You statement has been so explicit," said he at last, "that you have
     really left me very few questions to ask. There is one of the very
     utmost importance, however. Did you tell any one that you had this
     special task to perform?"

     "No one."

     "Not Miss Harrison here, for example?"

     "No. I had not been back to Woking between getting the order and
     executing the commission."

     "And none of your people had by chance been to see you?"

     "None."

     "Did any of them know their way about in the office?"

     "Oh, yes, all of them had been shown over it."

     "Still, of course, if you said nothing to any one about the treaty
     these inquiries are irrelevant."

     "I said nothing."

     "Do you know anything of the commissionaire?"

     "Nothing except that he is an old soldier."

     "What regiment?"

     "Oh, I have heard--Coldstream Guards."

     "Thank you. I have no doubt I can get details from Forbes. The
     authorities are excellent at amassing facts, though they do not
     always use them to advantage. What a lovely thing a rose is!"

     He walked past the couch to the open window, and held up the drooping
     stalk of a moss-rose, looking down at the dainty blend of crimson and
     green. It was a new phase of his character to me, for I had never
     before seen him show any keen interest in natural objects.

     "There is nothing in which deduction is so necessary as in religion,"
     said he, leaning with his back against the shutters. "It can be built
     up as an exact science by the reasoner. Our highest assurance of the
     goodness of Providence seems to me to rest in the flowers. All other
     things, our powers our desires, our food, are all really necessary
     for our existence in the first instance. But this rose is an extra.
     Its smell and its color are an embellishment of life, not a condition
     of it. It is only goodness which gives extras, and so I say again
     that we have much to hope from the flowers."

     Percy Phelps and his nurse looked at Holmes during this demonstration
     with surprise and a good deal of disappointment written upon their
     faces. He had fallen into a reverie, with the moss-rose between his
     fingers. It had lasted some minutes before the young lady broke in
     upon it.

     "Do you see any prospect of solving this mystery, Mr. Holmes?" she
     asked, with a touch of asperity in her voice.

     "Oh, the mystery!" he answered, coming back with a start to the
     realities of life. "Well, it would be absurd to deny that the case is
     a very abstruse and complicated one, but I can promise you that I
     will look into the matter and let you know any points which may
     strike me."

     "Do you see any clue?"

     "You have furnished me with seven, but, of course, I must test them
     before I can pronounce upon their value."

     "You suspect some one?"

     "I suspect myself."

     "What!"

     "Of coming to conclusions too rapidly."

     "Then go to London and test your conclusions."

     "Your advice is very excellent, Miss Harrison," said Holmes, rising.
     "I think, Watson, we cannot do better. Do not allow yourself to
     indulge in false hopes, Mr. Phelps. The affair is a very tangled
     one."

     "I shall be in a fever until I see you again," cried the diplomatist.

     "Well, I'll come out be the same train to-morrow, though it's more
     than likely that my report will be a negative one."

     "God bless you for promising to come," cried our client. "It gives me
     fresh life to know that something is being done. By the way, I have
     had a letter from Lord Holdhurst."

     "Ha! What did he say?"

     "He was cold, but not harsh. I dare say my severe illness prevented
     him from being that. He repeated that the matter was of the utmost
     importance, and added that no steps would be taken about my
     future--by which he means, of course, my dismissal--until my health
     was restored and I had an opportunity of repairing my misfortune."

     "Well, that was reasonable and considerate," said Holmes. "Come,
     Watson, for we have a goody day's work before us in town."

     Mr. Joseph Harrison drove us down to the station, and we were soon
     whirling up in a Portsmouth train. Holmes was sunk in profound
     thought, and hardly opened his mouth until we had passed Clapham
     Junction.

     "It's a very cheery thing to come into London by any of these lines
     which run high, and allow you to look down upon the houses like
     this."

     I thought he was joking, for the view was sordid enough, but he soon
     explained himself.

     "Look at those big, isolated clumps of building rising up above the
     slates, like brick islands in a lead-colored sea."

     "The board-schools."

     "Light-houses, my boy! Beacons of the future! Capsules with hundreds
     of bright little seeds in each, out of which will spring the wise,
     better England of the future. I suppose that man Phelps does not
     drink?"

     "I should not think so."

     "Nor should I, but we are bound to take every possibility into
     account. The poor devil has certainly got himself into very deep
     water, and it's a question whether we shall ever be able to get him
     ashore. What did you think of Miss Harrison?"

     "A girl of strong character."

     "Yes, but she is a good sort, or I am mistaken. She and her brother
     are the only children of an iron-master somewhere up Northumberland
     way. He got engaged to her when traveling last winter, and she came
     down to be introduced to his people, with her brother as escort. Then
     came the smash, and she stayed on to nurse her lover, while brother
     Joseph, finding himself pretty snug, stayed on too. I've been making
     a few independent inquiries, you see. But to-day must be a day of
     inquiries."

     "My practice--" I began.

     "Oh, if you find your own cases more interesting than mine--" said
     Holmes, with some asperity.

     "I was going to say that my practice could get along very well for a
     day or two, since it is the slackest time in the year."

     "Excellent," said he, recovering his good-humor. "Then we'll look
     into this matter together. I think that we should begin be seeing
     Forbes. He can probably tell us all the details we want until we know
     from what side the case is to be approached."

     "You said you had a clue?"

     "Well, we have several, but we can only test their value by further
     inquiry. The most difficult crime to track is the one which is
     purposeless. Now this is not purposeless. Who is it who profits by
     it? There is the French ambassador, there is the Russian, there is
     who-ever might sell it to either of these, and there is Lord
     Holdhurst."

     "Lord Holdhurst!"

     "Well, it is just conceivable that a statesman might find himself in
     a position where he was not sorry to have such a document
     accidentally destroyed."

     "Not a statesman with the honorable record of Lord Holdhurst?"

     "It is a possibility and we cannot afford to disregard it. We shall
     see the noble lord to-day and find out if he can tell us anything.
     Meanwhile I have already set inquiries on foot."

     "Already?"

     "Yes, I sent wires from Woking station to every evening paper in
     London. This advertisement will appear in each of them."

     He handed over a sheet torn from a note-book. On it was scribbled in
     pencil:

     "?0 reward. The number of the cab which dropped a fare at or about
     the door of the Foreign Office in Charles Street at quarter to ten in
     the evening of May 23d. Apply 221b, Baker Street."

     "You are confident that the thief came in a cab?"

     "If not, there is no harm done. But if Mr. Phelps is correct in
     stating that there is no hiding-place either in the room or the
     corridors, then the person must have come from outside. If he came
     from outside on so wet a night, and yet left no trace of damp upon
     the linoleum, which was examined within a few minutes of his passing,
     then it is exceeding probably that he came in a cab. Yes, I think
     that we may safely deduce a cab."

     "It sounds plausible."

     "That is one of the clues of which I spoke. It may lead us to
     something. And then, of course, there is the bell--which is the most
     distinctive feature of the case. Why should the bell ring? Was it the
     thief who did it out of bravado? Or was it some one who was with the
     thief who did it in order to prevent the crime? Or was it an
     accident? Or was it--?" He sank back into the state of intense and
     silent thought from which he had emerged; but it seemed to me,
     accustomed as I was to his every mood, that some new possibility had
     dawned suddenly upon him.

     It was twenty past three when we reached our terminus, and after a
     hasty luncheon at the buffet we pushed on at once to Scotland Yard.
     Holmes had already wired to Forbes, and we found him waiting to
     receive us--a small, foxy man with a sharp but by no means amiable
     expression. He was decidedly frigid in his manner to us, especially
     when he heard the errand upon which we had come.

     "I've heard of your methods before now, Mr. Holmes," said he, tartly.
     "You are ready enough to use all the information that the police can
     lay at your disposal, and then you try to finish the case yourself
     and bring discredit on them."

     "On the contrary," said Holmes, "out of my last fifty-three cases my
     name has only appeared in four, and the police have had all the
     credit in forty-nine. I don't blame you for not knowing this, for you
     are young and inexperienced, but if you wish to get on in your new
     duties you will work with me and not against me."

     "I'd be very glad of a hint or two," said the detective, changing his
     manner. "I've certainly had no credit from the case so far."

     "What steps have you taken?"

     "Tangey, the commissionaire, has been shadowed. He left the Guards
     with a good character and we can find nothing against him. His wife
     is a bad lot, though. I fancy she knows more about this than
     appears."

     "Have you shadowed her?"

     "We have set one of our women on to her. Mrs. Tangey drinks, and our
     woman has been with her twice when she was well on, but she could get
     nothing out of her."

     "I understand that they have had brokers in the house?"

     "Yes, but they were paid off."

     "Where did the money come from?"

     "That was all right. His pension was due. They have not shown any
     sign of being in funds."

     "What explanation did she give of having answered the bell when Mr.
     Phelps rang for the coffee?"

     "She said that he husband was very tired and she wished to relieve
     him."

     "Well, certainly that would agree with his being found a little later
     asleep in his chair. There is nothing against them then but the
     woman's character. Did you ask her why she hurried away that night?
     Her haste attracted the attention of the police constable."

     "She was later than usual and wanted to get home."

     "Did you point out to her that you and Mr. Phelps, who started at
     least twenty minutes after he, got home before her?"

     "She explains that by the difference between a 'bus and a hansom."

     "Did she make it clear why, on reaching her house, she ran into the
     back kitchen?"

     "Because she had the money there with which to pay off the brokers."

     "She has at least an answer for everything. Did you ask her whether
     in leaving she met any one or saw any one loitering about Charles
     Street?"

     "She saw no one but the constable."

     "Well, you seem to have cross-examined her pretty thoroughly. What
     else have you done?"

     "The clerk Gorot has been shadowed all these nine weeks, but without
     result. We can show nothing against him."

     "Anything else?"

     "Well, we have nothing else to go upon--no evidence of any kind."

     "Have you formed a theory about how that bell rang?"

     "Well, I must confess that it beats me. It was a cool hand, whoever
     it was, to go and give the alarm like that."

     "Yes, it was a queer thing to do. Many thanks to you for what you
     have told me. If I can put the man into your hands you shall hear
     from me. Come along, Watson."

     "Where are we going to now?" I asked, as we left the office.

     "We are now going to interview Lord Holdhurst, the cabinet minister
     and future premier of England."

     We were fortunate in finding that Lord Holdhurst was still in his
     chambers in Downing Street, and on Holmes sending in his card we were
     instantly shown up. The statesman received us with that old-fashioned
     courtesy for which he is remarkable, and seated us on the two
     luxuriant lounges on either side of the fireplace. Standing on the
     rug between us, with his slight, tall figure, his sharp features,
     thoughtful face, and curling hair prematurely tinged with gray, he
     seemed to represent that not to common type, a nobleman who is in
     truth noble.

     "Your name is very familiar to me, Mr. Holmes," said he, smiling.
     "And, of course, I cannot pretend to be ignorant of the object of
     your visit. There has only been one occurrence in these offices which
     could call for your attention. In whose interest are you acting, may
     I ask?"

     "In that of Mr. Percy Phelps," answered Holmes.

     "Ah, my unfortunate nephew! You can understand that our kinship makes
     it the more impossible for me to screen him in any way. I fear that
     the incident must have a very prejudicial effect upon his career."

     "But if the document is found?"

     "Ah, that, of course, would be different."

     "I had one or two questions which I wished to ask you, Lord
     Holdhurst."

     "I shall be happy to give you any information in my power."

     "Was it in this room that you gave your instructions as to the
     copying of the document?"

     "It was."

     "Then you could hardly have been overheard?"

     "It is out of the question."

     "Did you ever mention to any one that it was your intention to give
     any one the treaty to be copied?"

     "Never."

     "You are certain of that?"

     "Absolutely."

     "Well, since you never said so, and Mr. Phelps never said so, and
     nobody else knew anything of the matter, then the thief's presence in
     the room was purely accidental. He saw his chance and he took it."

     The statesman smiled. "You take me out of my province there," said
     he.

     Holmes considered for a moment. "There is another very important
     point which I wish to discuss with you," said he. "You feared, as I
     understand, that very grave results might follow from the details of
     this treaty becoming known."

     A shadow passed over the expressive face of the statesman. "Very
     grave results indeed."

     "Any have they occurred?"

     "Not yet."

     "If the treaty had reached, let us say, the French or Russian Foreign
     Office, you would expect to hear of it?"

     "I should," said Lord Holdhurst, with a wry face.

     "Since nearly ten weeks have elapsed, then, and nothing has been
     heard, it is not unfair to suppose that for some reason the treaty
     has not reached them."

     Lord Holdhurst shrugged his shoulders.

     "We can hardly suppose, Mr. Holmes, that the thief took the treaty in
     order to frame it and hang it up."

     "Perhaps he is waiting for a better price."

     "If he waits a little longer he will get no price at all. The treaty
     will cease to be secret in a few months."

     "That is most important," said Holmes. "Of course, it is a possible
     supposition that the thief has had a sudden illness--"

     "An attack of brain-fever, for example?" asked the statesman,
     flashing a swift glance at him.

     "I did not say so," said Holmes, imperturbably. "And now, Lord
     Holdhurst, we have already taken up too much of your valuable time,
     and we shall wish you good-day."

     "Every success to your investigation, be the criminal who it may,"
     answered the nobleman, as he bowed us out the door.

     "He's a fine fellow," said Holmes, as we came out into Whitehall.
     "But he has a struggle to keep up his position. He is far from rich
     and has many calls. You noticed, of course, that his boots had been
     resoled. Now, Watson, I won't detain you from your legitimate work
     any longer. I shall do nothing more to-day, unless I have an answer
     to my cab advertisement. But I should be extremely obliged to you if
     you would come down with me to Woking to-morrow, by the same train
     which we took yesterday."

     I met him accordingly next morning and we traveled down to Woking
     together. He had had no answer to his advertisement, he said, and no
     fresh light had been thrown upon the case. He had, when he so willed
     it, the utter immobility of countenance of a red Indian, and I could
     not gather from his appearance whether he was satisfied or not with
     the position of the case. His conversation, I remember, was about the
     Bertillon system of measurements, and he expressed his enthusiastic
     admiration of the French savant.

     We found our client still under the charge of his devoted nurse, but
     looking considerably better than before. He rose from the sofa and
     greeted us without difficulty when we entered.

     "Any news?" he asked, eagerly.

     "My report, as I expected, is a negative one," said Holmes. "I have
     seen Forbes, and I have seen your uncle, and I have set one or two
     trains of inquiry upon foot which may lead to something."

     "You have not lost heart, then?"

     "By no means."

     "God bless you for saying that!" cried Miss Harrison. "If we keep our
     courage and our patience the truth must come out."

     "We have more to tell you than you have for us," said Phelps,
     reseating himself upon the couch.

     "I hoped you might have something."

     "Yes, we have had an adventure during the night, and one which might
     have proved to be a serious one." His expression grew very grave as
     he spoke, and a look of something akin to fear sprang up in his eyes.
     "Do you know," said he, "that I begin to believe that I am the
     unconscious centre of some monstrous conspiracy, and that my life is
     aimed at as well as my honor?"

     "Ah!" cried Holmes.

     "It sounds incredible, for I have not, as far as I know, an enemy in
     the world. Yet from last night's experience I can come to no other
     conclusion."

     "Pray let me hear it."

     "You must know that last night was the very first night that I have
     ever slept without a nurse in the room. I was so much better that I
     thought I could dispense with one. I had a night-light burning,
     however. Well, about two in the morning I had sunk into a light sleep
     when I was suddenly aroused by a slight noise. It was like the sound
     which a mouse makes when it is gnawing a plank, and I lay listening
     to it for some time under the impression that it must come from that
     cause. Then it grew louder, and suddenly there came from the window a
     sharp metallic snick. I sat up in amazement. There could be no doubt
     what the sounds were now. The first ones had been caused by some one
     forcing an instrument through the slit between the sashes, and the
     second by the catch being pressed back.

     "There was a pause then for about ten minutes, as if the person were
     waiting to see whether the noise had awakened me. Then I heard a
     gentle creaking as the window was very slowly opened. I could stand
     it no longer, for my nerves are not what they used to be. I sprang
     out of bed and flung open the shutters. A man was crouching at the
     window. I could see little of him, for he was gone like a flash. He
     was wrapped in some sort of cloak which came across the lower part of
     his face. One thing only I am sure of, and that is that he had some
     weapon in his hand. It looked to me like a long knife. I distinctly
     saw the gleam of it as he turned to run."

     "This is most interesting," said Holmes. "Pray what did you do then?"

     "I should have followed him through the open window if I had been
     stronger. As it was, I rang the bell and roused the house. It took me
     some little time, for the bell rings in the kitchen and the servants
     all sleep upstairs. I shouted, however, and that brought Joseph down,
     and he roused the others. Joseph and the groom found marks on the bed
     outside the window, but the weather has been so dry lately that they
     found it hopeless to follow the trail across the grass. There's a
     place, however, on the wooden fence which skirts the road which shows
     signs, they tell me, as if some one had got over, and had snapped the
     top of the rail in doing so. I have said nothing to the local police
     yet, for I thought I had best have your opinion first."

     This tale of our client's appeared to have an extraordinary effect
     upon Sherlock Holmes. He rose from his chair and paced about the room
     in uncontrollable excitement.

     "Misfortunes never come single," said Phelps, smiling, though it was
     evident that his adventure had somewhat shaken him.

     "You have certainly had your share," said Holmes. "Do you think you
     could walk round the house with me?"

     "Oh, yes, I should like a little sunshine. Joseph will come, too."

     "And I also," said Miss Harrison.

     "I am afraid not," said Holmes, shaking his head. "I think I must ask
     you to remain sitting exactly where you are."

     The young lady resumed her seat with an air of displeasure. Her
     brother, however, had joined us and we set off all four together. We
     passed round the lawn to the outside of the young diplomatist's
     window. There were, as he had said, marks upon the bed, but they were
     hopelessly blurred and vague. Holmes stopped over them for an
     instant, and then rose shrugging his shoulders.

     "I don't think any one could make much of this," said he. "Let us go
     round the house and see why this particular room was chose by the
     burglar. I should have thought those larger windows of the
     drawing-room and dining-room would have had more attractions for
     him."

     "They are more visible from the road," suggested Mr. Joseph Harrison.

     "Ah, yes, of course. There is a door here which he might have
     attempted. What is it for?"

     "It is the side entrance for trades-people. Of course it is locked at
     night."

     "Have you ever had an alarm like this before?"

     "Never," said our client.

     "Do you keep plate in the house, or anything to attract burglars?"

     "Nothing of value."

     Holmes strolled round the house with his hands in his pockets and a
     negligent air which was unusual with him.

     "By the way," said he to Joseph Harrison, "you found some place, I
     understand, where the fellow scaled the fence. Let us have a look at
     that!"

     The plump young man led us to a spot where the top of one of the
     wooden rails had been cracked. A small fragment of the wood was
     hanging down. Holmes pulled it off and examined it critically.

     "Do you think that was done last night? It looks rather old, does it
     not?"

     "Well, possibly so."

     "There are no marks of any one jumping down upon the other side. No,
     I fancy we shall get no help here. Let us go back to the bedroom and
     talk the matter over."

     Percy Phelps was walking very slowly, leaning upon the arm of his
     future brother-in-law. Holmes walked swiftly across the lawn, and we
     were at the open window of the bedroom long before the others came
     up.

     "Miss Harrison," said Holmes, speaking with the utmost intensity of
     manner, "you must stay where you are all day. Let nothing prevent you
     from staying where you are all day. It is of the utmost importance."

     "Certainly, if you wish it, Mr. Holmes," said the girl in
     astonishment.

     "When you go to bed lock the door of this room on the outside and
     keep the key. Promise to do this."

     "But Percy?"

     "He will come to London with us."

     "And am I to remain here?"

     "It is for his sake. You can serve him. Quick! Promise!"

     She gave a quick nod of assent just as the other two came up.

     "Why do you sit moping there, Annie?" cried her brother. "Come out
     into the sunshine!"

     "No, thank you, Joseph. I have a slight headache and this room is
     deliciously cool and soothing."

     "What do you propose now, Mr. Holmes?" asked our client.

     "Well, in investigating this minor affair we must not lose sight of
     our main inquiry. It would be a very great help to me if you would
     come up to London with us."

     "At once?"

     "Well, as soon as you conveniently can. Say in an hour."

     "I feel quite strong enough, if I can really be of any help."

     "The greatest possible."

     "Perhaps you would like me to stay there to-night?"

     "I was just going to propose it."

     "Then, if my friend of the night comes to revisit me, he will find
     the bird flown. We are all in your hands, Mr. Holmes, and you must
     tell us exactly what you would like done. Perhaps you would prefer
     that Joseph came with us so as to look after me?"

     "Oh, no; my friend Watson is a medical man, you know, and he'll look
     after you. We'll have our lunch here, if you will permit us, and then
     we shall all three set off for town together."

     It was arranged as he suggested, though Miss Harrison excused herself
     from leaving the bedroom, in accordance with Holmes's suggestion.
     What the object of my friend's manoeuvres was I could not conceive,
     unless it were to keep the lady away from Phelps, who, rejoiced by
     his returning health and by the prospect of action, lunched with us
     in the dining-room. Holmes had still more startling surprise for us,
     however, for, after accompanying us down to the station and seeing us
     into our carriage, he calmly announced that he had no intention of
     leaving Woking.

     "There are one or two small points which I should desire to clear up
     before I go," said he. "Your absence, Mr. Phelps, will in some ways
     rather assist me. Watson, when you reach London you would oblige me
     by driving at once to Baker Street with our friend here, and
     remaining with him until I see you again. It is fortunate that you
     are old school-fellows, as you must have much to talk over. Mr.
     Phelps can have the spare bedroom to-night, and I will be with you in
     time for breakfast, for there is a train which will take me into
     Waterloo at eight."

     "But how about our investigation in London?" asked Phelps, ruefully.

     "We can do that to-morrow. I think that just at present I can be of
     more immediate use here."

     "You might tell them at Briarbrae that I hope to be back to-morrow
     night," cried Phelps, as we began to move from the platform.

     "I hardly expect to go back to Briarbrae," answered Holmes, and waved
     his hand to us cheerily as we shot out from the station.

     Phelps and I talked it over on our journey, but neither of us could
     devise a satisfactory reason for this new development.

     "I suppose he wants to find out some clue as to the burglary last
     night, if a burglar it was. For myself, I don't believe it was an
     ordinary thief."

     "What is your own idea, then?"

     "Upon my word, you may put it down to my weak nerves or not, but I
     believe there is some deep political intrigue going on around me, and
     that for some reason that passes my understanding my life is aimed at
     by the conspirators. It sounds high-flown and absurd, but consider
     the fats! Why should a thief try to break in at a bedroom window,
     where there could be no hope of any plunder, and why should he come
     with a long knife in his hand?"

     "You are sure it was not a house-breaker's jimmy?"

     "Oh, no, it was a knife. I saw the flash of the blade quite
     distinctly."

     "But why on earth should you be pursued with such animosity?"

     "Ah, that is the question."

     "Well, if Holmes takes the same view, that would account for his
     action, would it not? Presuming that your theory is correct, if he
     can lay his hands upon the man who threatened you last night he will
     have gone a long way towards finding who took the naval treaty. It is
     absurd to suppose that you have two enemies, one of whom robs you,
     while the other threatens your life."

     "But Holmes said that he was not going to Briarbrae."

     "I have known him for some time," said I, "but I never knew him do
     anything yet without a very good reason," and with that our
     conversation drifted off on to other topics.

     But it was a weary day for me. Phelps was still weak after his long
     illness, and his misfortune made him querulous and nervous. In vain I
     endeavored to interest him in Afghanistan, in India, in social
     questions, in anything which might take his mind out of the groove.
     He would always come back to his lost treaty, wondering, guessing,
     speculating, as to what Holmes was doing, what steps Lord Holdhurst
     was taking, what news we should have in the morning. As the evening
     wore on his excitement became quite painful.

     "You have implicit faith in Holmes?" he asked.

     "I have seen him do some remarkable things."

     "But he never brought light into anything quite so dark as this?"

     "Oh, yes, I have known him solve questions which presented fewer
     clues than yours."

     "But not where such large interests are at stake?"

     "I don't know that. To my certain knowledge he has acted on behalf of
     three of the reigning houses of Europe in very vital matters."

     "But you know him well, Watson. He is such an inscrutable fellow that
     I never quite know what to make of him. Do you think he is hopeful?
     Do you think he expects to make a success of it?"

     "He has said nothing."

     "That is a bad sign."

     "On the contrary, I have noticed that when he is off the trail he
     generally says so. It is when he is on a scent and is not quite
     absolutely sure yet that it is the right one that he is most
     taciturn. Now, my dear fellow, we can't help matters by making
     ourselves nervous about them, so let me implore you to go to bed and
     so be fresh for whatever may await us to-morrow."

     I was able at last to persuade my companion to take my advice, though
     I knew from his excited manner that there was not much hope of sleep
     for him. Indeed, his mood was infectious, for I lay tossing half the
     night myself, brooding over this strange problem, and inventing a
     hundred theories, each of which was more impossible than the last.
     Why had Holmes remained at Woking? Why had he asked Miss Harrison to
     remain in the sick-room all day? Why had he been so careful not to
     inform the people at Briarbrae that he intended to remain near them?
     I cudgelled my brains until I fell asleep in the endeavor to find
     some explanation which would cover all these facts.

     It was seven o'clock when I awoke, and I set off at once for Phelps's
     room, to find him haggard and spent after a sleepless night. His
     first question was whether Holmes had arrived yet.

     "He'll be here when he promised," said I, "and not an instant sooner
     or later."

     And my words were true, for shortly after eight a hansom dashed up to
     the door and our friend got out of it. Standing in the window we saw
     that his left hand was swathed in a bandage and that his face was
     very grim and pale. He entered the house, but it was some little time
     before he came upstairs.

     "He looks like a beaten man," cried Phelps.

     I was forced to confess that he was right. "After all," said I, "the
     clue of the matter lies probably here in town."

     Phelps gave a groan.

     "I don't know how it is," said he, "but I had hoped for so much from
     his return. But surely his hand was not tied up like that yesterday.
     What can be the matter?"

     "You are not wounded, Holmes?" I asked, as my friend entered the
     room.

     "Tut, it is only a scratch through my own clumsiness," he answered,
     nodding his good-mornings to us. "This case of yours, Mr. Phelps, is
     certainly one of the darkest which I have ever investigated."

     "I feared that you would find it beyond you."

     "It has been a most remarkable experience."

     "That bandage tells of adventures," said I. "Won't you tell us what
     has happened?"

     "After breakfast, my dear Watson. Remember that I have breathed
     thirty miles of Surrey air this morning. I suppose that there has
     been no answer from my cabman advertisement? Well, well, we cannot
     expect to score every time."

     The table was all laid, and just as I was about to ring Mrs. Hudson
     entered with the tea and coffee. A few minutes later she brought in
     three covers, and we all drew up to the table, Holmes ravenous, I
     curious, and Phelps in the gloomiest state of depression.

     "Mrs. Hudson has risen to the occasion," said Holmes, uncovering a
     dish of curried chicken. "Her cuisine is a little limited, but she
     has as good an idea of breakfast as a Scotch-woman. What have you
     here, Watson?"

     "Ham and eggs," I answered.

     "Good! What are you going to take, Mr. Phelps--curried fowl or eggs,
     or will you help yourself?"

     "Thank you. I can eat nothing," said Phelps.

     "Oh, come! Try the dish before you."

     "Thank you, I would really rather not."

     "Well, then," said Holmes, with a mischievous twinkle, "I suppose
     that you have no objection to helping me?"

     Phelps raised the cover, and as he did so he uttered a scream, and
     sat there staring with a face as white as the plate upon which he
     looked. Across the centre of it was lying a little cylinder of
     blue-gray paper. He caught it up, devoured it with his eyes, and then
     danced madly about the room, passing it to his bosom and shrieking
     out in his delight. Then he fell back into an arm-chair so limp and
     exhausted with his own emotions that we had to pour brandy down his
     throat to keep him from fainting.

     "There! there!" said Holmes, soothing, patting him upon the shoulder.
     "It was too bad to spring it on you like this, but Watson here will
     tell you that I never can resist a touch of the dramatic."

     Phelps seized his hand and kissed it. "God bless you!" he cried. "You
     have saved my honor."

     "Well, my own was at stake, you know," said Holmes. "I assure you it
     is just as hateful to me to fail in a case as it can be to you to
     blunder over a commission."

     Phelps thrust away the precious document into the innermost pocket of
     his coat.

     "I have not the heart to interrupt your breakfast any further, and
     yet I am dying to know how you got it and where it was."

     Sherlock Holmes swallowed a cup of coffee, and turned his attention
     to the ham and eggs. Then he rose, lit his pipe, and settled himself
     down into his chair.

     "I'll tell you what I did first, and how I came to do it afterwards,"
     said he. "After leaving you at the station I went for a charming walk
     through some admirable Surrey scenery to a pretty little village
     called Ripley, where I had my tea at an inn, and took the precaution
     of filling my flask and of putting a paper of sandwiches in my
     pocket. There I remained until evening, when I set off for Woking
     again, and found myself in the high-road outside Briarbrae just after
     sunset.

     "Well, I waited until the road was clear--it is never a very
     frequented one at any time, I fancy--and then I clambered over the
     fence into the grounds."

     "Surely the gate was open!" ejaculated Phelps.

     "Yes, but I have a peculiar taste in these matters. I chose the place
     where the three fir-trees stand, and behind their screen I got over
     without the least chance of any one in the house being able to see
     me. I crouched down among the bushes on the other side, and crawled
     from one to the other--witness the disreputable state of my trouser
     knees--until I had reached the clump of rhododendrons just opposite
     to your bedroom window. There I squatted down and awaited
     developments.

     "The blind was not down in your room, and I could see Miss Harrison
     sitting there reading by the table. It was quarter-past ten when she
     closed her book, fastened the shutters, and retired.

     "I heard her shut the door, and felt quite sure that she had turned
     the key in the lock."

     "The key!" ejaculated Phelps.

     "Yes, I had given Miss Harrison instructions to lock the door on the
     outside and take the key with her when she went to bed. She carried
     out every one of my injunctions to the letter, and certainly without
     her cooperation you would not have that paper in you coat-pocket. She
     departed then and the lights went out, and I was left squatting in
     the rhododendron-bush.

     "The night was fine, but still it was a very weary vigil. Of course
     it has the sort of excitement about it that the sportsman feels when
     he lies beside the water-course and waits for the big game. It was
     very long, though--almost as long, Watson, as when you and I waited
     in that deadly room when we looked into the little problem of the
     Speckled Band. There was a church-clock down at Woking which struck
     the quarters, and I thought more than once that it had stopped. At
     last however about two in the morning, I suddenly heard the gentle
     sound of a bolt being pushed back and the creaking of a key. A moment
     later the servant's door was opened, and Mr. Joseph Harrison stepped
     out into the moonlight."

     "Joseph!" ejaculated Phelps.

     "He was bare-headed, but he had a black coat thrown over his shoulder
     so that he could conceal his face in an instant if there were any
     alarm. He walked on tiptoe under the shadow of the wall, and when he
     reached the window he worked a long-bladed knife through the sash and
     pushed back the catch. Then he flung open the window, and putting his
     knife through the crack in the shutters, he thrust the bar up and
     swung them open.

     "From where I lay I had a perfect view of the inside of the room and
     of every one of his movements. He lit the two candles which stood
     upon the mantelpiece, and then he proceeded to turn back the corner
     of the carpet in the neighborhood of the door. Presently he stopped
     and picked out a square piece of board, such as is usually left to
     enable plumbers to get at the joints of the gas-pipes. This one
     covered, as a matter of fact, the T joint which gives off the pipe
     which supplies the kitchen underneath. Out of this hiding-place he
     drew that little cylinder of paper, pushed down the board, rearranged
     the carpet, blew out the candles, and walked straight into my arms as
     I stood waiting for him outside the window.

     "Well, he has rather more viciousness than I gave him credit for, has
     Master Joseph. He flew at me with his knife, and I had to grasp him
     twice, and got a cut over the knuckles, before I had the upper hand
     of him. He looked murder out of the only eye he could see with when
     we had finished, but he listened to reason and gave up the papers.
     Having got them I let my man go, but I wired full particulars to
     Forbes this morning. If he is quick enough to catch is bird, well and
     good. But if, as I shrewdly suspect, he finds the nest empty before
     he gets there, why, all the better for the government. I fancy that
     Lord Holdhurst for one, and Mr. Percy Phelps for another, would very
     much rather that the affair never got as far as a police-court.

     "My God!" gasped our client. "Do you tell me that during these long
     ten weeks of agony the stolen papers were within the very room with
     me all the time?"

     "So it was."

     "And Joseph! Joseph a villain and a thief!"

     "Hum! I am afraid Joseph's character is a rather deeper and more
     dangerous one than one might judge from his appearance. From what I
     have heard from him this morning, I gather that he has lost heavily
     in dabbling with stocks, and that he is ready to do anything on earth
     to better his fortunes. Being an absolutely selfish man, when a
     chance presented itself he did not allow either his sister's
     happiness or your reputation to hold his hand."

     Percy Phelps sank back in his chair. "My head whirls," said he. "Your
     words have dazed me."

     "The principal difficulty in your case," remarked Holmes, in his
     didactic fashion, "lay in the fact of there being too much evidence.
     What was vital was overlaid and hidden by what was irrelevant. Of all
     the facts which were presented to us we had to pick just those which
     we deemed to be essential, and then piece them together in their
     order, so as to reconstruct this very remarkable chain of events. I
     had already begun to suspect Joseph, from the fact that you had
     intended to travel home with him that night, and that therefore it
     was a likely enough thing that he should call for you, knowing the
     Foreign Office well, upon his way. When I heard that some one had
     been so anxious to get into the bedroom, in which no one but Joseph
     could have concealed anything--you told us in your narrative how you
     had turned Joseph out when you arrived with the doctor--my suspicions
     all changed to certainties, especially as the attempt was made on the
     first night upon which the nurse was absent, showing that the
     intruder was well acquainted with the ways of the house."

     "How blind I have been!"

     "The facts of the case, as far as I have worked them out, are these:
     this Joseph Harrison entered the office through the Charles Street
     door, and knowing his way he walked straight into your room the
     instant after you left it. Finding no one there he promptly rang the
     bell, and at the instant that he did so his eyes caught the paper
     upon the table. A glance showed him that chance had put in his way a
     State document of immense value, and in an instant he had thrust it
     into his pocket and was gone. A few minutes elapsed, as you remember,
     before the sleepy commissionaire drew your attention to the bell, and
     those were just enough to give the thief time to make his escape.

     "He made his way to Woking by the first train, and having examined
     his booty and assured himself that it really was of immense value, he
     had concealed it in what he thought was a very safe place, with the
     intention of taking it out again in a day or two, and carrying it to
     the French embassy, or wherever he thought that a long price was to
     be had. Then came your sudden return. He, without a moment's warning,
     was bundled out of his room, and from that time onward there were
     always at least two of you there to prevent him from regaining his
     treasure. The situation to him must have been a maddening one. But at
     last he thought he saw his chance. He tried to steal in, but was
     baffled by your wakefulness. You remember that you did not take your
     usual draught that night."

     "I remember."

     "I fancy that he had taken steps to make that draught efficacious,
     and that he quite relied upon your being unconscious. Of course, I
     understood that he would repeat the attempt whenever it could be done
     with safety. Your leaving the room gave him the chance he wanted. I
     kept Miss Harrison in it all day so that he might not anticipate us.
     Then, having given him the idea that the coast was clear, I kept
     guard as I have described. I already knew that the papers were
     probably in the room, but I had no desire to rip up all the planking
     and skirting in search of them. I let him take them, therefore, from
     the hiding-place, and so saved myself an infinity of trouble. Is
     there any other point which I can make clear?"

     "Why did he try the window on the first occasion," I asked, "when he
     might have entered by the door?"

     "In reaching the door he would have to pass seven bedrooms. On the
     other hand, he could get out on to the lawn with ease. Anything
     else?"

     "You do not think," asked Phelps, "that he had any murderous
     intention? The knife was only meant as a tool."

     "It may be so," answered Holmes, shrugging his shoulders. "I can only
     say for certain that Mr. Joseph Harrison is a gentleman to whose
     mercy I should be extremely unwilling to trust."






                                THE FINAL PROBLEM

     It is with a heavy heart that I take up my pen to write these the
     last words in which I shall ever record the singular gifts by which
     my friend Mr. Sherlock Holmes was distinguished.  In an incoherent
     and, as I deeply feel, an entirely inadequate fashion, I have
     endeavored to give some account of my strange experiences in his
     company from the chance which first brought us together at the period
     of the "Study in Scarlet," up to the time of his interference in the
     matter of the "Naval Treaty"--an interference which had the
     unquestionable effect of preventing a serious international
     complication.  It was my intention to have stopped there, and to have
     said nothing of that event which has created a void in my life which
     the lapse of two years has done little to fill.  My hand has been
     forced, however, by the recent letters in which Colonel James
     Moriarty defends the memory of his brother, and I have no choice but
     to lay the facts before the public exactly as they occurred.  I alone
     know the absolute truth of the matter, and I am satisfied that the
     time has come when no good purpose is to be served by its
     suppression.  As far as I know, there have been only three accounts
     in the public press:  that in the Journal de Genve on May 6th, 1891,
     the Reuter's despatch in the English papers on May 7th, and finally
     the recent letters to which I have alluded.  Of these the first and
     second were extremely condensed, while the last is, as I shall now
     show, an absolute perversion of the facts.  It lies with me to tell
     for the first time what really took place between Professor Moriarty
     and Mr. Sherlock Holmes.

     It may be remembered that after my marriage, and my subsequent start
     in private practice, the very intimate relations which had existed
     between Holmes and myself became to some extent modified.  He still
     came to me from time to time when he desired a companion in his
     investigation, but these occasions grew more and more seldom, until I
     find that in the year 1890 there were only three cases of which I
     retain any record.  During the winter of that year and the early
     spring of 1891, I saw in the papers that he had been engaged by the
     French government upon a matter of supreme importance, and I received
     two notes from Holmes, dated from Narbonne and from Nimes, from which
     I gathered that his stay in France was likely to be a long one.  It
     was with some surprise, therefore, that I saw him walk into my
     consulting-room upon the evening of April 24th.  It struck me that he
     was looking even paler and thinner than usual.

     "Yes, I have been using myself up rather too freely," he remarked, in
     answer to my look rather than to my words; "I have been a little
     pressed of late.  Have you any objection to my closing your
     shutters?"

     The only light in the room came from the lamp upon the table at which
     I had been reading.  Holmes edged his way round the wall and flinging
     the shutters together, he bolted them securely.

     "You are afraid of something?" I asked.

     "Well, I am."

     "Of what?"

     "Of air-guns."

     "My dear Holmes, what do you mean?"

     "I think that you know me well enough, Watson, to understand that I
     am by no means a nervous man.  At the same time, it is stupidity
     rather than courage to refuse to recognize danger when it is close
     upon you.  Might I trouble you for a match?"  He drew in the smoke of
     his cigarette as if the soothing influence was grateful to him.

     "I must apologize for calling so late," said he, "and I must further
     beg you to be so unconventional as to allow me to leave your house
     presently by scrambling over your back garden wall."

     "But what does it all mean?" I asked.

     He held out his hand, and I saw in the light of the lamp that two of
     his knuckles were burst and bleeding.

     "It is not an airy nothing, you see," said he, smiling.  "On the
     contrary, it is solid enough for a man to break his hand over.  Is
     Mrs. Watson in?"

     "She is away upon a visit."

     "Indeed!  You are alone?"

     "Quite."

     "Then it makes it the easier for me to propose that you should come
     away with me for a week to the Continent."

     "Where?"

     "Oh, anywhere.  It's all the same to me."

     There was something very strange in all this.  It was not Holmes's
     nature to take an aimless holiday, and something about his pale, worn
     face told me that his nerves were at their highest tension.  He saw
     the question in my eyes, and, putting his finger-tips together and
     his elbows upon his knees, he explained the situation.

     "You have probably never heard of Professor Moriarty?" said he.

     "Never."

     "Aye, there's the genius and the wonder of the thing!" he cried. 
     "The man pervades London, and no one has heard of him.  That's what
     puts him on a pinnacle in the records of crime.  I tell you, Watson,
     in all seriousness, that if I could beat that man, if I could free
     society of him, I should feel that my own career had reached its
     summit, and I should be prepared to turn to some more placid line in
     life.  Between ourselves, the recent cases in which I have been of
     assistance to the royal family of Scandinavia, and to the French
     republic, have left me in such a position that I could continue to
     live in the quiet fashion which is most congenial to me, and to
     concentrate my attention upon my chemical researches.  But I could
     not rest, Watson, I could not sit quiet in my chair, if I thought
     that such a man as Professor Moriarty were walking the streets of
     London unchallenged."

     "What has he done, then?"

     "His career has been an extraordinary one.  He is a man of good birth
     and excellent education, endowed by nature with a phenomenal
     mathematical faculty.  At the age of twenty-one he wrote a treatise
     upon the Binomial Theorem, which has had a European vogue.  On the
     strength of it he won the Mathematical Chair at one of our smaller
     universities, and had, to all appearance, a most brilliant career
     before him.  But the man had hereditary tendencies of the most
     diabolical kind.  A criminal strain ran in his blood, which, instead
     of being modified, was increased and rendered infinitely more
     dangerous by his extraordinary mental powers.  Dark rumors gathered
     round him in the university town, and eventually he was compelled to
     resign his chair and to come down to London, where he set up as an
     army coach.  So much is known to the world, but what I am telling you
     now is what I have myself discovered.

     "As you are aware, Watson, there is no one who knows the higher
     criminal world of London so well as I do.  For years past I have
     continually been conscious of some power behind the malefactor, some
     deep organizing power which forever stands in the way of the law, and
     throws its shield over the wrong-doer.  Again and again in cases of
     the most varying sorts--forgery cases, robberies, murders--I have
     felt the presence of this force, and I have deduced its action in
     many of those undiscovered crimes in which I have not been personally
     consulted.  For years I have endeavored to break through the veil
     which shrouded it, and at last the time came when I seized my thread
     and followed it, until it led me, after a thousand cunning windings,
     to ex-Professor Moriarty of mathematical celebrity.

     "He is the Napoleon of crime, Watson.  He is the organizer of half
     that is evil and of nearly all that is undetected in this great city.
      He is a genius, a philosopher, an abstract thinker.  He has a brain
     of the first order.  He sits motionless, like a spider in the center
     of its web, but that web has a thousand radiations, and he knows well
     every quiver of each of them.  He does little himself.  He only
     plans.  But his agents are numerous and splendidly organized.  Is
     there a crime to be done, a paper to be abstracted, we will say, a
     house to be rifled, a man to be removed--the word is passed to the
     Professor, the matter is organized and carried out.  The agent may be
     caught.  In that case money is found for his bail or his defence. 
     But the central power which uses the agent is never caught--never so
     much as suspected.  This was the organization which I deduced,
     Watson, and which I devoted my whole energy to exposing and breaking
     up.

     "But the Professor was fenced round with safeguards so cunningly
     devised that, do what I would, it seemed impossible to get evidence
     which would convict in a court of law.  You know my powers, my dear
     Watson, and yet at the end of three months I was forced to confess
     that I had at last met an antagonist who was my intellectual equal. 
     My horror at his crimes was lost in my admiration at his skill.  But
     at last he made a trip--only a little, little trip--but it was more
     than he could afford when I was so close upon him.  I had my chance,
     and, starting from that point, I have woven my net round him until
     now it is all ready to close.  In three days--that is to say, on
     Monday next--matters will be ripe, and the Professor, with all the
     principal members of his gang, will be in the hands of the police. 
     Then will come the greatest criminal trial of the century, the
     clearing up of over forty mysteries, and the rope for all of them;
     but if we move at all prematurely, you understand, they may slip out
     of our hands even at the last moment.

     "Now, if I could have done this without the knowledge of Professor
     Moriarty, all would have been well.  But he was too wily for that. 
     He saw every step which I took to draw my toils round him.  Again and
     again he strove to break away, but I as often headed him off.  I tell
     you, my friend, that if a detailed account of that silent contest
     could be written, it would take its place as the most brilliant bit
     of thrust-and-parry work in the history of detection.  Never have I
     risen to such a height, and never have I been so hard pressed by an
     opponent.  He cut deep, and yet I just undercut him.  This morning
     the last steps were taken, and three days only were wanted to
     complete the business.  I was sitting in my room thinking the matter
     over, when the door opened and Professor Moriarty stood before me.

     "My nerves are fairly proof, Watson, but I must confess to a start
     when I saw the very man who had been so much in my thoughts standing
     there on my threshold.  His appearance was quite familiar to me.  He
     is extremely tall and thin, his forehead domes out in a white curve,
     and his two eyes are deeply sunken in his head.  He is clean-shaven,
     pale, and ascetic-looking, retaining something of the professor in
     his features.  His shoulders are rounded from much study, and his
     face protrudes forward, and is forever slowly oscillating from side
     to side in a curiously reptilian fashion.  He peered at me with great
     curiosity in his puckered eyes.

     "'You have less frontal development that I should have expected,'
     said he, at last.  'It is a dangerous habit to finger loaded firearms
     in the pocket of one's dressing-gown.'

     "The fact is that upon his entrance I had instantly recognized the
     extreme personal danger in which I lay.  The only conceivable escape
     for him lay in silencing my tongue.  In an instant I had slipped the
     revolver from the drawer into my pocket, and was covering him through
     the cloth.  At his remark I drew the weapon out and laid it cocked
     upon the table.  He still smiled and blinked, but there was something
     about his eyes which made me feel very glad that I had it there.

     "'You evidently don't now me,' said he.

     "'On the contrary,' I answered, 'I think it is fairly evident that I
     do.  Pray take a chair.  I can spare you five minutes if you have
     anything to say.'

     "'All that I have to say has already crossed your mind,' said he.

     "'Then possibly my answer has crossed yours,' I replied.

     "'You stand fast?'

     "'Absolutely.'

     "He clapped his hand into his pocket, and I raised the pistol from
     the table.  But he merely drew out a memorandum-book in which he had
     scribbled some dates.

     "'You crossed my patch on the 4th of January,' said he.  'On the 23d
     you incommoded me; by the middle of February I was seriously
     inconvenienced by you; at the end of March I was absolutely hampered
     in my plans; and now, at the close of April, I find myself placed in
     such a position through your continual persecution that I am in
     positive danger of losing my liberty.  The situation is becoming an
     impossible one.'

     "'Have you any suggestion to make?' I asked.

     "'You must drop it, Mr. Holmes,' said he, swaying his face about. 
     'You really must, you know.'

     "'After Monday,' said I.

     "'Tut, tut,' said he.  'I am quite sure that a man of your
     intelligence will see that there can be but one outcome to this
     affair.  It is necessary that you should withdraw.  You have worked
     things in such a fashion that we have only one resource left.  It has
     been an intellectual treat to me to see the way in which you have
     grappled with this affair, and I say, unaffectedly, that it would be
     a grief to me to be forced to take any extreme measure.  You smile,
     sir, abut I assure you that it really would.'

     "'Danger is part of my trade,' I remarked.

     "'That is not danger,' said he.  'It is inevitable destruction.  You
     stand in the way not merely of an individual, but of a mighty
     organization, the full extent of which you, with all your cleverness,
     have been unable to realize.  You must stand clear, Mr. Holmes, or be
     trodden under foot.'

     "'I am afraid,' said I, rising, 'that in the pleasure of this
     conversation I am neglecting business of importance which awaits me
     elsewhere.'

     "He rose also and looked at me in silence, shaking his head sadly.

     "'Well, well,' said he, at last.  'It seems a pity, but I have done
     what I could.  I know every move of your game.  You can do nothing
     before Monday.  It has been a duel between you and me, Mr. Holmes. 
     You hope to place me in the dock.  I tell you that I will never stand
     in the dock.  You hope to beat me.  I tell you that you will never
     beat me.  If you are clever enough to bring destruction upon me, rest
     assured that I shall do as much to you.'

     "'You have paid me several compliments, Mr. Moriarty,' said I.  'Let
     me pay you one in return when I say that if I were assured of the
     former eventuality I would, in the interests of the public,
     cheerfully accept the latter.'

     "'I can promise you the one, but not the other,' he snarled, and so
     turned his rounded back upon me, and went peering and blinking out of
     the room.

     "That was my singular interview with Professor Moriarty.  I confess
     that it left an unpleasant effect upon my mind.  His soft, precise
     fashion of speech leaves a conviction of sincerity which a mere bully
     could not produce.  Of course, you will say:  'Why not take police
     precautions against him?'  the reason is that I am well convinced
     that it is from his agents the blow will fall.  I have the best
     proofs that it would be so."

     "You have already been assaulted?"

     "My dear Watson, Professor Moriarty is not a man who lets the grass
     grow under his feet.  I went out about mid-day to transact some
     business in Oxford Street.  As I passed the corner which leads from
     Bentinck Street on to the Welbeck Street crossing a two-horse van
     furiously driven whizzed round and was on me like a flash.  I sprang
     for the foot-path and saved myself by the fraction of a second.  The
     van dashed round by Marylebone Lane and was gone in an instant.  I
     kept to the pavement after that, Watson, but as I walked down Vere
     Street a brick came down from the roof of one of the houses, and was
     shattered to fragments at my feet.  I called the police and had the
     place examined.  There were slates and bricks piled up on the roof
     preparatory to some repairs, and they would have me believe that the
     wind had toppled over one of these.  Of course I knew better, but I
     could prove nothing.  I took a cab after that and reached my
     brother's rooms in Pall Mall, where I spent the day.  Now I have come
     round to you, and on my way I was attacked by a rough with a
     bludgeon.  I knocked him down, and the police have him in custody;
     but I can tell you with the most absolute confidence that no possible
     connection will ever be traced between the gentleman upon whose front
     teeth I have barked my knuckles and the retiring mathematical coach,
     who is, I dare say, working out problems upon a black-board ten miles
     away.  You will not wonder, Watson, that my first act on entering
     your rooms was to close your shutters, and that I have been compelled
     to ask your permission to leave the house by some less conspicuous
     exit than the front door."

     I had often admired my friend's courage, but never more than now, as
     he sat quietly checking off a series of incidents which must have
     combined to make up a day of horror.

     "You will spend the night here?" I said.

     "No, my friend, you might find me a dangerous guest.  I have my plans
     laid, and all will be well.  Matters have gone so far now that they
     can move without my help as far as the arrest goes, though my
     presence is necessary for a conviction.  It is obvious, therefore,
     that I cannot do better than get away for the few days which remain
     before the police are at liberty to act.  It would be a great
     pleasure to me, therefore, if you could come on to the Continent with
     me."

     "The practice is quiet," said I, "and I have an accommodating
     neighbor.  I should be glad to come."

     "And to start to-morrow morning?"

     "If necessary."

     "Oh yes, it is most necessary.  Then these are your instructions, and
     I beg, my dear Watson, that you will obey them to the letter, for you
     are now playing a double-handed game with me against the cleverest
     rogue and the most powerful syndicate of criminals in Europe.  Now
     listen!  You will dispatch whatever luggage you intend to take by a
     trusty messenger unaddressed to Victoria to-night.  In the morning
     you will send for a hansom, desiring your man to take neither the
     first nor the second which may present itself.  Into this hansom you
     will jump, and you will drive to the Strand end of the Lowther
     Arcade, handling the address to the cabman upon a slip of paper, with
     a request that he will not throw it away.  Have your fare ready, and
     the instant that your cab stops, dash through the Arcade, timing
     yourself to reach the other side at a quarter-past nine.  You will
     find a small brougham waiting close to the curb, driven by a fellow
     with a heavy black cloak tipped at the collar with red.  Into this
     you will step, and you will reach Victoria in time for the
     Continental express."

     "Where shall I meet you?"

     "At the station.  The second first-class carriage from the front will
     be reserved for us."

     "The carriage is our rendezvous, then?"

     "Yes."

     It was in vain that I asked Holmes to remain for the evening.  It was
     evident to me that he thought he might bring trouble to the roof he
     was under, and that that was the motive which impelled him to go. 
     With a few hurried words as to our plans for the morrow he rose and
     came out with me into the garden, clambering over the wall which
     leads into Mortimer Street, and immediately whistling for a hansom,
     in which I heard him drive away.

     In the morning I obeyed Holmes's injunctions to the letter.  A hansom
     was procured with such precaution as would prevent its being one
     which was placed ready for us, and I drove immediately after
     breakfast to the Lowther Arcade, through which I hurried at the top
     of my speed.  A brougham was waiting with a very massive driver
     wrapped in a dark cloak, who, the instant that I had stepped in,
     whipped up the horse and rattled off to Victoria Station.  On my
     alighting there he turned the carriage, and dashed away again without
     so much as a look in my direction.

     So far all had gone admirably.  My luggage was waiting for me, and I
     had no difficulty in finding the carriage which Holmes had indicated,
     the less so as it was the only one in the train which was marked
     "Engaged."  My only source of anxiety now was the non-appearance of
     Holmes.  The station clock marked only seven minutes from the time
     when we were due to start.  In vain I searched among the groups of
     travellers and leave-takers for the lithe figure of my friend.  There
     was no sign of him.  I spent a few minutes in assisting a venerable
     Italian priest, who was endeavoring to make a porter understand, in
     his broken English, that his luggage was to be booked through to
     Paris.  Then, having taken another look round, I returned to my
     carriage, where I found that the porter, in spite of the ticket, had
     given me my decrepit Italian friend as a traveling companion.  It was
     useless for me to explain to him that his presence was an intrusion,
     for my Italian was even more limited than his English, so I shrugged
     my shoulders resignedly, and continued to look out anxiously for my
     friend.  A chill of fear had come over me, as I thought that his
     absence might mean that some blow had fallen during the night. 
     Already the doors had all been shut and the whistle blown, when--

     "My dear Watson," said a voice, "you have not even condescended to
     say good-morning."

     I turned in uncontrollable astonishment.  The aged ecclesiastic had
     turned his face towards me.  For an instant the wrinkles were
     smoothed away, the nose drew away from the chin, the lower lip ceased
     to protrude and the mouth to mumble, the dull eyes regained their
     fire, the drooping figure expanded.  The next the whole frame
     collapsed again, and Holmes had gone as quickly as he had come.

     "Good heavens!" I cried; "how you startled me!"

     "Every precaution is still necessary," he whispered.  "I have reason
     to think that they are hot upon our trail.  Ah, there is Moriarty
     himself."

     The train had already begun to move as Holmes spoke.  Glancing back,
     I saw a tall man pushing his way furiously through the crowd, and
     waving his hand as if he desired to have the train stopped.  It was
     too late, however, for we were rapidly gathering momentum, and an
     instant later had shot clear of the station.

     "With all our precautions, you see that we have cut it rather fine,"
     said Holmes, laughing.  He rose, and throwing off the black cassock
     and hat which had formed his disguise, he packed them away in a
     hand-bag.

     "Have you seen the morning paper, Watson?"

     "No."

     "You haven't seen about Baker Street, then?"

     "Baker Street?"

     "They set fire to our rooms last night.  No great harm was done."

     "Good heavens, Holmes, this is intolerable!"

     "They must have lost my track completely after their bludgeon-man was
     arrested.  Otherwise they could not have imagined that I had returned
     to my rooms.  They have evidently taken the precaution of watching
     you, however, and that is what has brought Moriarty to Victoria.  You
     could not have made any slip in coming?"

     "I did exactly what you advised."

     "Did you find your brougham?"

     "Yes, it was waiting."

     "Did you recognize your coachman?"

     "No."

     "It was my brother Mycroft.  It is an advantage to get about in such
     a case without taking a mercenary into your confidence.  But we must
     plan what we are to do about Moriarty now."

     "As this is an express, and as the boat runs in connection with it, I
     should think we have shaken him off very effectively."

     "My dear Watson, you evidently did not realize my meaning when I said
     that this man may be taken as being quite on the same intellectual
     plane as myself.  You do not imagine that if I were the pursuer I
     should allow myself to be baffled by so slight an obstacle.  Why,
     then, should you think so meanly of him?"

     "What will he do?"

     "What I should do?"

     "What would you do, then?"

     "Engage a special."

     "But it must be late."

     "By no means.  This train stops at Canterbury; and there is always at
     least a quarter of an hour's delay at the boat.  He will catch us
     there."

     "One would think that we were the criminals.  Let us have him
     arrested on his arrival."

     "It would be to ruin the work of three months.  We should get the big
     fish, but the smaller would dart right and left out of the net.  On
     Monday we should have them all.  No, an arrest is inadmissible."

     "What then?"

     "We shall get out at Canterbury."

     "And then?"

     "Well, then we must make a cross-country journey to Newhaven, and so
     over to Dieppe.  Moriarty will again do what I should do.  He will
     get on to Paris, mark down our luggage, and wait for two days at the
     depot.  In the meantime we shall treat ourselves to a couple of
     carpet-bags, encourage the manufactures of the countries through
     which we travel, and make our way at our leisure into Switzerland,
     via Luxembourg and Basle."

     At Canterbury, therefore, we alighted, only to find that we should
     have to wait an hour before we could get a train to Newhaven.

     I was still looking rather ruefully after the rapidly disappearing
     luggage-van which contained my wardrobe, when Holmes pulled my sleeve
     and pointed up the line.

     "Already, you see," said he.

     Far away, from among the Kentish woods there rose a thin spray of
     smoke.  A minute later a carriage and engine could be seen flying
     along the open curve which leads to the station.  We had hardly time
     to take our place behind a pile of luggage when it passed with a
     rattle and a roar, beating a blast of hot air into our faces.

     "There he goes," said Holmes, as we watched the carriage swing and
     rock over the point. "There are limits, you see, to our friend's
     intelligence.  It would have been a coup-de-matre had he deduced
     what I would deduce and acted accordingly."

     "And what would he have done had he overtaken us?"

     "There cannot be the least doubt that he would have made a murderous
     attack upon me.  It is, however, a game at which two may play.  The
     question, now is whether we should take a premature lunch here, or
     run our chance of starving before we reach the buffet at Newhaven."

     We made our way to Brussels that night and spent two days there,
     moving on upon the third day as far as Strasburg.  On the Monday
     morning Holmes had telegraphed to the London police, and in the
     evening we found a reply waiting for us at our hotel.  Holmes tore it
     open, and then with a bitter curse hurled it into the grate.

     "I might have known it!" he groaned.  "He has escaped!"

     "Moriarty?"

     "They have secured the whole gang with the exception of him.  He has
     given them the slip.  Of course, when I had left the country there
     was no one to cope with him.  But I did think that I had put the game
     in their hands.  I think that you had better return to England,
     Watson."

     "Why?"

     "Because you will find me a dangerous companion now.  This man's
     occupation is gone.  He is lost if he returns to London.  If I read
     his character right he will devote his whole energies to revenging
     himself upon me.  He said as much in our short interview, and I fancy
     that he meant it.  I should certainly recommend you to return to your
     practice."

     It was hardly an appeal to be successful with one who was an old
     campaigner as well as an old friend.  We sat in the Strasbourg
     salle-?manger arguing the question for half an hour, but the same
     night we had resumed our journey and were well on our way to Geneva.

     For a charming week we wandered up the Valley of the Rhone, and then,
     branching off at Leuk, we made our way over the Gemmi Pass, still
     deep in snow, and so, by way of Interlaken, to Meiringen.  It was a
     lovely trip, the dainty green of the spring below, the virgin white
     of the winter above; but it was clear to me that never for one
     instant did Holmes forget the shadow which lay across him.  In the
     homely Alpine villages or in the lonely mountain passes, I could tell
     by his quick glancing eyes and his sharp scrutiny of every face that
     passed us, that he was well convinced that, walk where we would, we
     could not walk ourselves clear of the danger which was dogging our
     footsteps.

     Once, I remember, as we passed over the Gemmi, and walked along the
     border of the melancholy Daubensee, a large rock which had been
     dislodged from the ridge upon our right clattered down and roared
     into the lake behind us.  In an instant Holmes had raced up on to the
     ridge, and, standing upon a lofty pinnacle, craned his neck in every
     direction.  It was in vain that our guide assured him that a fall of
     stones was a common chance in the spring-time at that spot.  He said
     nothing, but he smiled at me with the air of a man who sees the
     fulfillment of that which he had expected.

     And yet for all his watchfulness he was never depressed.  On the
     contrary, I can never recollect having seen him in such exuberant
     spirits.  Again and again he recurred to the fact that if he could be
     assured that society was freed from Professor Moriarty he would
     cheerfully bring his own career to a conclusion.

     "I think that I may go so far as to say, Watson, that I have not
     lived wholly in vain," he remarked.  "If my record were closed
     to-night I could still survey it with equanimity.  The air of London
     is the sweeter for my presence.  In over a thousand cases I am not
     aware that I have ever used my powers upon the wrong side.  Of late I
     have been tempted to look into the problems furnished by nature
     rather than those more superficial ones for which our artificial
     state of society is responsible.  Your memoirs will draw to an end,
     Watson, upon the day that I crown my career by the capture or
     extinction of the most dangerous and capable criminal in Europe."

     I shall be brief, and yet exact, in the little which remains for me
     to tell.  It is not a subject on which I would willingly dwell, and
     yet I am conscious that a duty devolves upon me to omit no detail.

     It was on the third of May that we reached the little village of
     Meiringen, where we put up at the Englischer Hof, then kept by Peter
     Steiler the elder.  Our landlord was an intelligent  man, and spoke
     excellent English, having served for three years as waiter at the
     Grosvenor Hotel in London.  At his advice, on the afternoon of the
     fourth we set off together, with the intention of crossing the hills
     and spending the night at the hamlet of Rosenlaui.  We had strict
     injunctions, however, on no account to pass the falls of Reichenbach,
     which are about half-way up the hill, without making a small detour
     to see them.

     It is, indeed, a fearful place.  The torrent, swollen by the melting
     snow, plunges into a tremendous abyss, from which the spray rolls up
     like the smoke from a burning house.  The shaft into which the river
     hurls itself is an immense chasm, lined by glistening coal-black
     rock, and narrowing into a creaming, boiling pit of incalculable
     depth, which brims over and shoots the stream onward over its jagged
     lip.  The long sweep of green water roaring forever down, and the
     thick flickering curtain of spray hissing forever upward, turn a man
     giddy with their constant whirl and clamor.  We stood near the edge
     peering down at the gleam of the breaking water far below us against
     the black rocks, and listening to the half-human shout which came
     booming up with the spray out of the abyss.

     The path has been cut half-way round the fall to afford a complete
     view, but it ends abruptly, and the traveler has to return as he
     came.  We had turned to do so, when we saw a Swiss lad come running
     along it with a letter in his hand.  It bore the mark of the hotel
     which we had just left, and was addressed to me by the landlord.  It
     appeared that within a very few minutes of our leaving, an English
     lady had arrived who was in the last stage of consumption.  She had
     wintered at Davos Platz, and was journeying now to join her friends
     at Lucerne, when a sudden hemorrhage had overtaken her.  It was
     thought that she could hardly live a few hours, but it would be a
     great consolation to her to see an English doctor, and, if I would
     only return, etc.  The good Steiler assured me in a postscript that
     he would himself look upon my compliance as a very great favor, since
     the lady absolutely refused to see a Swiss physician, and he could
     not but feel that he was incurring a great responsibility.

     The appeal was one which could not be ignored.  It was impossible to
     refuse the request of a fellow-countrywoman dying in a strange land. 
     Yet I had my scruples about leaving Holmes.  It was finally agreed,
     however, that he should retain the young Swiss messenger with him as
     guide and companion while I returned to Meiringen.  My friend would
     stay some little time at the fall, he said, and would then walk
     slowly over the hill to Rosenlaui, where I was to rejoin him in the
     evening.  As I turned away I saw Holmes, with his back against a rock
     and his arms folded, gazing down at the rush of the waters.  It was
     the last that I was ever destined to see of him in this world.

     When I was near the bottom of the descent I looked back.  It was
     impossible, from that position, to see the fall, but I could see the
     curving path which winds over the shoulder of the hill and leads to
     it.  Along this a man was, I remember, walking very rapidly.

     I could see his black figure clearly outlined against the green
     behind him.  I noted him, and the energy with which he walked but he
     passed from my mind again as I hurried on upon my errand.

     It may have been a little over an hour before I reached Meiringen. 
     Old Steiler was standing at the porch of his hotel.

     "Well," said I, as I came hurrying up, "I trust that she is no
     worse?"

     A look of surprise passed over his face, and at the first quiver of
     his eyebrows my heart turned to lead in my breast.

     "You did not write this?" I said, pulling the letter from my pocket. 
     "There is no sick Englishwoman in the hotel?"

     "Certainly not!" he cried.  "But it has the hotel mark upon it!  Ha,
     it must have been written by that tall Englishman who came in after
     you had gone.  He said--"

     But I waited for none of the landlord's explanations.  In a tingle of
     fear I was already running down the village street, and making for
     the path which I had so lately descended.  It had taken me an hour to
     come down.  For all my efforts two more had passed before I found
     myself at the fall of Reichenbach once more.  There was Holmes's
     Alpine-stock still leaning against the rock by which I had left him. 
     But there was no sign of him, and it was in vain that I shouted.  My
     only answer was my own voice reverberating in a rolling echo from the
     cliffs around me.

     It was the sight of that Alpine-stock which turned me cold and sick. 
     He had not gone to Rosenlaui, then.  He had remained on that
     three-foot path, with sheer wall on one side and sheer drop on the
     other, until his enemy had overtaken him.  The young Swiss had gone
     too.  He had probably been in the pay of Moriarty, and had left the
     two men together.  And then what had happened?  Who was to tell us
     what had happened then?

     I stood for a minute or two to collect myself, for I was dazed with
     the horror of the thing.  Then I began to think of Holmes's own
     methods and to try to practise them in reading this tragedy.  It was,
     alas, only too easy to do.  During our conversation we had not gone
     to the end of the path, and the Alpine-stock marked the place where
     we had stood.  The blackish soil is kept forever soft by the
     incessant drift of spray, and a bird would leave its tread upon it. 
     Two lines of footmarks were clearly marked along the farther end of
     the path, both leading away from me.  There were none returning.  A
     few yards from the end the soil was all ploughed up into a patch of
     mud, and the branches and ferns which fringed the chasm were torn and
     bedraggled.  I lay upon my face and peered over with the spray
     spouting up all around me.  It had darkened since I left, and now I
     could only see here and there the glistening of moisture upon the
     black walls, and far away down at the end of the shaft the gleam of
     the broken water.  I shouted; but only the same half-human cry of the
     fall was borne back to my ears.

     But it was destined that I should after all have a last word of
     greeting from my friend and comrade.  I have said that his
     Alpine-stock had been left leaning against a rock which jutted on to
     the path.  From the top of this bowlder the gleam of something bright
     caught my eye, and, raising my hand, I found that it came from the
     silver cigarette-case which he used to carry.  As I took it up a
     small square of paper upon which it had lain fluttered down on to the
     ground.  Unfolding it, I found that it consisted of three pages torn
     from his note-book and addressed to me.  It was characteristic of the
     man that the direction was as precise, and the writing as firm and
     clear, as though it had been written in his study.

     My dear Watson [it said]:
     I write these few lines through the courtesy of Mr. Moriarty, who
     awaits my convenience for the final discussion of those questions
     which lie between us.  He has been giving me a sketch of the methods
     by which he avoided the English police and kept himself informed of
     our movements.  They certainly confirm the very high opinion which I
     had formed of his abilities.  I am pleased to think that I shall be
     able to free society from any further effects of his presence, though
     I fear that it is at a cost which will give pain to my friends, and
     especially, my dear Watson, to you.  I have already explained to you,
     however, that my career had in any case reached its crisis, and that
     no possible conclusion to it could be more congenial to me than this.
      Indeed, if I may make a full confession to you, I was quite
     convinced that the letter from Meiringen was a hoax, and I allowed
     you to depart on that errand under the persuasion that some
     development of this sort would follow.  Tell Inspector Patterson that
     the papers which he needs to convict the gang are in pigeonhole M.,
     done up in a blue envelope and inscribed "Moriarty."  I made every
     disposition of my property before leaving England, and handed it to
     my brother Mycroft.  Pray give my greetings to Mrs. Watson, and
     believe me to be, my dear fellow,
     Very sincerely yours,
     Sherlock Holmes

     A few words may suffice to tell the little that remains.  An
     examination by experts leaves little doubt that a personal contest
     between the two men ended, as it could hardly fail to end in such a
     situation, in their reeling over, locked in each other's arms.  Any
     attempt at recovering the bodies was absolutely hopeless, and there,
     deep down in that dreadful cauldron of swirling water and seething
     foam, will lie for all time the most dangerous criminal and the
     foremost champion of the law of their generation.  The Swiss youth
     was never found again, and there can be no doubt that he was one of
     the numerous agents whom Moriarty kept in his employ.  As to the
     gang, it will be within the memory of the public how completely the
     evidence which Holmes had accumulated exposed their organization, and
     how heavily the hand of the dead man weighed upon them.  Of their
     terrible chief few details came out during the proceedings, and if I
     have now been compelled to make a clear statement of his career it is
     due to those injudicious champions who have endeavored to clear his
     memory by attacks upon him whom I shall ever regard as the best and
     the wisest man whom I have ever known.






                          THE RETURN OF SHERLOCK HOLMES





                        THE ADVENTURE OF THE EMPTY HOUSE

     It was in the spring of the year 1894 that all London was interested,
     and the fashionable world dismayed, by the murder of the Honourable
     Ronald Adair under most unusual and inexplicable circumstances. The
     public has already learned those particulars of the crime which came
     out in the police investigation; but a good deal was suppressed upon
     that occasion, since the case for the prosecution was so
     overwhelmingly strong that it was not necessary to bring forward all
     the facts. Only now, at the end of nearly ten years, am I allowed to
     supply those missing links which make up the whole of that remarkable
     chain. The crime was of interest in itself, but that interest was as
     nothing to me compared to the inconceivable sequel, which afforded me
     the greatest shock and surprise of any event in my adventurous life.
     Even now, after this long interval, I find myself thrilling as I
     think of it, and feeling once more that sudden flood of joy,
     amazement, and incredulity which utterly submerged my mind. Let me
     say to that public which has shown some interest in those glimpses
     which I have occasionally given them of the thoughts and actions of a
     very remarkable man that they are not to blame me if I have not
     shared my knowledge with them, for I should have considered it my
     first duty to have done so had I not been barred by a positive
     prohibition from his own lips, which was only withdrawn upon the
     third of last month.

     It can be imagined that my close intimacy with Sherlock Holmes had
     interested me deeply in crime, and that after his disappearance I
     never failed to read with care the various problems which came before
     the public, and I even attempted more than once for my own private
     satisfaction to employ his methods in their solution, though with
     indifferent success. There was none, however, which appealed to me
     like this tragedy of Ronald Adair. As I read the evidence at the
     inquest, which led up to a verdict of wilful murder against some
     person or persons unknown, I realized more clearly than I had ever
     done the loss which the community had sustained by the death of
     Sherlock Holmes. There were points about this strange business which
     would, I was sure, have specially appealed to him, and the efforts of
     the police would have been supplemented, or more probably
     anticipated, by the trained observation and the alert mind of the
     first criminal agent in Europe. All day as I drove upon my round I
     turned over the case in my mind, and found no explanation which
     appeared to me to be adequate. At the risk of telling a twice-told
     tale I will recapitulate the facts as they were known to the public
     at the conclusion of the inquest.

     The Honourable Ronald Adair was the second son of the Earl of
     Maynooth, at that time Governor of one of the Australian Colonies.
     Adair's mother had returned from Australia to undergo the operation
     for cataract, and she, her son Ronald, and her daughter Hilda were
     living together at 427, Park Lane. The youth moved in the best
     society, had, so far as was known, no enemies, and no particular
     vices. He had been engaged to Miss Edith Woodley, of Carstairs, but
     the engagement had been broken off by mutual consent some months
     before, and there was no sign that it had left any very profound
     feeling behind it. For the rest the man's life moved in a narrow and
     conventional circle, for his habits were quiet and his nature
     unemotional. Yet it was upon this easy-going young aristocrat that
     death came in most strange and unexpected form between the hours of
     ten and eleven-twenty on the night of March 30, 1894.

     Ronald Adair was fond of cards, playing continually, but never for
     such stakes as would hurt him. He was a member of the Baldwin, the
     Cavendish, and the Bagatelle card clubs. It was shown that after
     dinner on the day of his death he had played a rubber of whist at the
     latter club. He had also played there in the afternoon. The evidence
     of those who had played with him--Mr. Murray, Sir John Hardy, and
     Colonel Moran--showed that the game was whist, and that there was a
     fairly equal fall of the cards. Adair might have lost five pounds,
     but not more. His fortune was a considerable one, and such a loss
     could not in any way affect him. He had played nearly every day at
     one club or other, but he was a cautious player, and usually rose a
     winner. It came out in evidence that in partnership with Colonel
     Moran he had actually won as much as four hundred and twenty pounds
     in a sitting some weeks before from Godfrey Milner and Lord Balmoral.
     So much for his recent history, as it came out at the inquest.

     On the evening of the crime he returned from the club exactly at ten.
     His mother and sister were out spending the evening with a relation.
     The servant deposed that she heard him enter the front room on the
     second floor, generally used as his sitting-room. She had lit a fire
     there, and as it smoked she had opened the window. No sound was heard
     from the room until eleven-twenty, the hour of the return of Lady
     Maynooth and her daughter. Desiring to say good-night, she had
     attempted to enter her son's room. The door was locked on the inside,
     and no answer could be got to their cries and knocking. Help was
     obtained and the door forced. The unfortunate young man was found
     lying near the table. His head had been horribly mutilated by an
     expanding revolver bullet, but no weapon of any sort was to be found
     in the room. On the table lay two bank-notes for ten pounds each and
     seventeen pounds ten in silver and gold, the money arranged in little
     piles of varying amount. There were some figures also upon a sheet of
     paper with the names of some club friends opposite to them, from
     which it was conjectured that before his death he was endeavouring to
     make out his losses or winnings at cards.

     A minute examination of the circumstances served only to make the
     case more complex. In the first place, no reason could be given why
     the young man should have fastened the door upon the inside. There
     was the possibility that the murderer had done this and had
     afterwards escaped by the window. The drop was at least twenty feet,
     however, and a bed of crocuses in full bloom lay beneath. Neither the
     flowers nor the earth showed any sign of having been disturbed, nor
     were there any marks upon the narrow strip of grass which separated
     the house from the road. Apparently, therefore, it was the young man
     himself who had fastened the door. But how did he come by his death?
     No one could have climbed up to the window without leaving traces.
     Suppose a man had fired through the window, it would indeed be a
     remarkable shot who could with a revolver inflict so deadly a wound.
     Again, Park Lane is a frequented thoroughfare, and there is a
     cab-stand within a hundred yards of the house. No one had heard a
     shot. And yet there was the dead man, and there the revolver bullet,
     which had mushroomed out, as soft-nosed bullets will, and so
     inflicted a wound which must have caused instantaneous death. Such
     were the circumstances of the Park Lane Mystery, which were further
     complicated by entire absence of motive, since, as I have said, young
     Adair was not known to have any enemy, and no attempt had been made
     to remove the money or valuables in the room.

     All day I turned these facts over in my mind, endeavouring to hit
     upon some theory which could reconcile them all, and to find that
     line of least resistance which my poor friend had declared to be the
     starting-point of every investigation. I confess that I made little
     progress. In the evening I strolled across the Park, and found myself
     about six o'clock at the Oxford Street end of Park Lane. A group of
     loafers upon the pavements, all staring up at a particular window,
     directed me to the house which I had come to see. A tall, thin man
     with coloured glasses, whom I strongly suspected of being a
     plain-clothes detective, was pointing out some theory of his own,
     while the others crowded round to listen to what he said. I got as
     near him as I could, but his observations seemed to me to be absurd,
     so I withdrew again in some disgust. As I did so I struck against an
     elderly deformed man, who had been behind me, and I knocked down
     several books which he was carrying. I remember that as I picked them
     up I observed the title of one of them, The Origin of Tree Worship,
     and it struck me that the fellow must be some poor bibliophile who,
     either as a trade or as a hobby, was a collector of obscure volumes.
     I endeavoured to apologize for the accident, but it was evident that
     these books which I had so unfortunately maltreated were very
     precious objects in the eyes of their owner. With a snarl of contempt
     he turned upon his heel, and I saw his curved back and white
     side-whiskers disappear among the throng.

     My observations of No. 427, Park Lane did little to clear up the
     problem in which I was interested. The house was separated from the
     street by a low wall and railing, the whole not more than five feet
     high. It was perfectly easy, therefore, for anyone to get into the
     garden, but the window was entirely inaccessible, since there was no
     water-pipe or anything which could help the most active man to climb
     it. More puzzled than ever I retraced my steps to Kensington. I had
     not been in my study five minutes when the maid entered to say that a
     person desired to see me. To my astonishment it was none other than
     my strange old book-collector, his sharp, wizened face peering out
     from a frame of white hair, and his precious volumes, a dozen of them
     at least, wedged under his right arm.

     "You're surprised to see me, sir," said he, in a strange, croaking
     voice.

     I acknowledged that I was.

     "Well, I've a conscience, sir, and when I chanced to see you go into
     this house, as I came hobbling after you, I thought to myself, I'll
     just step in and see that kind gentleman, and tell him that if I was
     a bit gruff in my manner there was not any harm meant, and that I am
     much obliged to him for picking up my books."

     "You make too much of a trifle," said I. "May I ask how you knew who
     I was?"

     "Well, sir, if it isn't too great a liberty, I am a neighbour of
     yours, for you'll find my little bookshop at the corner of Church
     Street, and very happy to see you, I am sure. Maybe you collect
     yourself, sir; here's British Birds, and Catullus, and The Holy
     War--a bargain every one of them. With five volumes you could just
     fill that gap on that second shelf. It looks untidy, does it not,
     sir?"

     I moved my head to look at the cabinet behind me. When I turned again
     Sherlock Holmes was standing smiling at me across my study table. I
     rose to my feet, stared at him for some seconds in utter amazement,
     and then it appears that I must have fainted for the first and the
     last time in my life. Certainly a grey mist swirled before my eyes,
     and when it cleared I found my collar-ends undone and the tingling
     after-taste of brandy upon my lips. Holmes was bending over my chair,
     his flask in his hand.

     "My dear Watson," said the well-remembered voice, "I owe you a
     thousand apologies. I had no idea that you would be so affected."

     I gripped him by the arm.

     "Holmes!" I cried. "Is it really you? Can it indeed be that you are
     alive? Is it possible that you succeeded in climbing out of that
     awful abyss?"

     "Wait a moment," said he. "Are you sure that you are really fit to
     discuss things? I have given you a serious shock by my unnecessarily
     dramatic reappearance."

     "I am all right, but indeed, Holmes, I can hardly believe my eyes.
     Good heavens, to think that you--you of all men--should be standing
     in my study!" Again I gripped him by the sleeve and felt the thin,
     sinewy arm beneath it. "Well, you're not a spirit, anyhow," said I.
     "My dear chap, I am overjoyed to see you. Sit down and tell me how
     you came alive out of that dreadful chasm."

     He sat opposite to me and lit a cigarette in his old nonchalant
     manner. He was dressed in the seedy frock-coat of the book merchant,
     but the rest of that individual lay in a pile of white hair and old
     books upon the table. Holmes looked even thinner and keener than of
     old, but there was a dead-white tinge in his aquiline face which told
     me that his life recently had not been a healthy one.

     "I am glad to stretch myself, Watson," said he. "It is no joke when a
     tall man has to take a foot off his stature for several hours on end.
     Now, my dear fellow, in the matter of these explanations we have, if
     I may ask for your co-operation, a hard and dangerous night's work in
     front of us. Perhaps it would be better if I gave you an account of
     the whole situation when that work is finished."

     "I am full of curiosity. I should much prefer to hear now."

     "You'll come with me to-night?"

     "When you like and where you like."

     "This is indeed like the old days. We shall have time for a mouthful
     of dinner before we need go. Well, then, about that chasm. I had no
     serious difficulty in getting out of it, for the very simple reason
     that I never was in it."

     "You never were in it?"

     "No, Watson, I never was in it. My note to you was absolutely
     genuine. I had little doubt that I had come to the end of my career
     when I perceived the somewhat sinister figure of the late Professor
     Moriarty standing upon the narrow pathway which led to safety. I read
     an inexorable purpose in his grey eyes. I exchanged some remarks with
     him, therefore, and obtained his courteous permission to write the
     short note which you afterwards received. I left it with my
     cigarette-box and my stick and I walked along the pathway, Moriarty
     still at my heels. When I reached the end I stood at bay. He drew no
     weapon, but he rushed at me and threw his long arms around me. He
     knew that his own game was up, and was only anxious to revenge
     himself upon me. We tottered together upon the brink of the fall. I
     have some knowledge, however, of baritsu, or the Japanese system of
     wrestling, which has more than once been very useful to me. I slipped
     through his grip, and he with a horrible scream kicked madly for a
     few seconds and clawed the air with both his hands. But for all his
     efforts he could not get his balance, and over he went. With my face
     over the brink I saw him fall for a long way. Then he struck a rock,
     bounded off, and splashed into the water."

     I listened with amazement to this explanation, which Holmes delivered
     between the puffs of his cigarette.

     "But the tracks!" I cried. "I saw with my own eyes that two went down
     the path and none returned."

     "It came about in this way. The instant that the Professor had
     disappeared it struck me what a really extraordinarily lucky chance
     Fate had placed in my way. I knew that Moriarty was not the only man
     who had sworn my death. There were at least three others whose desire
     for vengeance upon me would only be increased by the death of their
     leader. They were all most dangerous men. One or other would
     certainly get me. On the other hand, if all the world was convinced
     that I was dead they would take liberties, these men, they would lay
     themselves open, and sooner or later I could destroy them. Then it
     would be time for me to announce that I was still in the land of the
     living. So rapidly does the brain act that I believe I had thought
     this all out before Professor Moriarty had reached the bottom of the
     Reichenbach Fall.

     "I stood up and examined the rocky wall behind me. In your
     picturesque account of the matter, which I read with great interest
     some months later, you assert that the wall was sheer. This was not
     literally true. A few small footholds presented themselves, and there
     was some indication of a ledge. The cliff is so high that to climb it
     all was an obvious impossibility, and it was equally impossible to
     make my way along the wet path without leaving some tracks. I might,
     it is true, have reversed my boots, as I have done on similar
     occasions, but the sight of three sets of tracks in one direction
     would certainly have suggested a deception. On the whole, then, it
     was best that I should risk the climb. It was not a pleasant
     business, Watson. The fall roared beneath me. I am not a fanciful
     person, but I give you my word that I seemed to hear Moriarty's voice
     screaming at me out of the abyss. A mistake would have been fatal.
     More than once, as tufts of grass came out in my hand or my foot
     slipped in the wet notches of the rock, I thought that I was gone.
     But I struggled upwards, and at last I reached a ledge several feet
     deep and covered with soft green moss, where I could lie unseen in
     the most perfect comfort. There I was stretched when you, my dear
     Watson, and all your following were investigating in the most
     sympathetic and inefficient manner the circumstances of my death.

     "At last, when you had all formed your inevitable and totally
     erroneous conclusions, you departed for the hotel and I was left
     alone. I had imagined that I had reached the end of my adventures,
     but a very unexpected occurrence showed me that there were surprises
     still in store for me. A huge rock, falling from above, boomed past
     me, struck the path, and bounded over into the chasm. For an instant
     I thought that it was an accident; but a moment later, looking up, I
     saw a man's head against the darkening sky, and another stone struck
     the very ledge upon which I was stretched, within a foot of my head.
     Of course, the meaning of this was obvious. Moriarty had not been
     alone. A confederate--and even that one glance had told me how
     dangerous a man that confederate was--had kept guard while the
     Professor had attacked me. From a distance, unseen by me, he had been
     a witness of his friend's death and of my escape. He had waited, and
     then, making his way round to the top of the cliff, he had
     endeavoured to succeed where his comrade had failed.

     "I did not take long to think about it, Watson. Again I saw that grim
     face look over the cliff, and I knew that it was the precursor of
     another stone. I scrambled down on to the path. I don't think I could
     have done it in cold blood. It was a hundred times more difficult
     than getting up. But I had no time to think of the danger, for
     another stone sang past me as I hung by my hands from the edge of the
     ledge. Halfway down I slipped, but by the blessing of God I landed,
     torn and bleeding, upon the path. I took to my heels, did ten miles
     over the mountains in the darkness, and a week later I found myself
     in Florence with the certainty that no one in the world knew what had
     become of me.

     "I had only one confidant--my brother Mycroft. I owe you many
     apologies, my dear Watson, but it was all-important that it should be
     thought I was dead, and it is quite certain that you would not have
     written so convincing an account of my unhappy end had you not
     yourself thought that it was true. Several times during the last
     three years I have taken up my pen to write to you, but always I
     feared lest your affectionate regard for me should tempt you to some
     indiscretion which would betray my secret. For that reason I turned
     away from you this evening when you upset my books, for I was in
     danger at the time, and any show of surprise and emotion upon your
     part might have drawn attention to my identity and led to the most
     deplorable and irreparable results. As to Mycroft, I had to confide
     in him in order to obtain the money which I needed. The course of
     events in London did not run so well as I had hoped, for the trial of
     the Moriarty gang left two of its most dangerous members, my own most
     vindictive enemies, at liberty. I travelled for two years in Tibet,
     therefore, and amused myself by visiting Lhassa and spending some
     days with the head Llama. You may have read of the remarkable
     explorations of a Norwegian named Sigerson, but I am sure that it
     never occurred to you that you were receiving news of your friend. I
     then passed through Persia, looked in at Mecca, and paid a short but
     interesting visit to the Khalifa at Khartoum, the results of which I
     have communicated to the Foreign Office. Returning to France I spent
     some months in a research into the coal-tar derivatives, which I
     conducted in a laboratory at Montpelier, in the South of France.
     Having concluded this to my satisfaction, and learning that only one
     of my enemies was now left in London, I was about to return when my
     movements were hastened by the news of this very remarkable Park Lane
     Mystery, which not only appealed to me by its own merits, but which
     seemed to offer some most peculiar personal opportunities. I came
     over at once to London, called in my own person at Baker Street,
     threw Mrs. Hudson into violent hysterics, and found that Mycroft had
     preserved my rooms and my papers exactly as they had always been. So
     it was, my dear Watson, that at two o'clock to-day I found myself in
     my old arm-chair in my own old room, and only wishing that I could
     have seen my old friend Watson in the other chair which he has so
     often adorned."

     Such was the remarkable narrative to which I listened on that April
     evening--a narrative which would have been utterly incredible to me
     had it not been confirmed by the actual sight of the tall, spare
     figure and the keen, eager face, which I had never thought to see
     again. In some manner he had learned of my own sad bereavement, and
     his sympathy was shown in his manner rather than in his words. "Work
     is the best antidote to sorrow, my dear Watson," said he, "and I have
     a piece of work for us both to-night which, if we can bring it to a
     successful conclusion, will in itself justify a man's life on this
     planet." In vain I begged him to tell me more. "You will hear and see
     enough before morning," he answered. "We have three years of the past
     to discuss. Let that suffice until half-past nine, when we start upon
     the notable adventure of the empty house."

     It was indeed like old times when, at that hour, I found myself
     seated beside him in a hansom, my revolver in my pocket and the
     thrill of adventure in my heart. Holmes was cold and stern and
     silent. As the gleam of the street-lamps flashed upon his austere
     features I saw that his brows were drawn down in thought and his thin
     lips compressed. I knew not what wild beast we were about to hunt
     down in the dark jungle of criminal London, but I was well assured
     from the bearing of this master huntsman that the adventure was a
     most grave one, while the sardonic smile which occasionally broke
     through his ascetic gloom boded little good for the object of our
     quest.

     I had imagined that we were bound for Baker Street, but Holmes
     stopped the cab at the corner of Cavendish Square. I observed that as
     he stepped out he gave a most searching glance to right and left, and
     at every subsequent street corner he took the utmost pains to assure
     that he was not followed. Our route was certainly a singular one.
     Holmes's knowledge of the byways of London was extraordinary, and on
     this occasion he passed rapidly, and with an assured step, through a
     network of mews and stables the very existence of which I had never
     known. We emerged at last into a small road, lined with old, gloomy
     houses, which led us into Manchester Street, and so to Blandford
     Street. Here he turned swiftly down a narrow passage, passed through
     a wooden gate into a deserted yard, and then opened with a key the
     back door of a house. We entered together and he closed it behind us.

     The place was pitch-dark, but it was evident to me that it was an
     empty house. Our feet creaked and crackled over the bare planking,
     and my outstretched hand touched a wall from which the paper was
     hanging in ribbons. Holmes's cold, thin fingers closed round my wrist
     and led me forwards down a long hall, until I dimly saw the murky
     fanlight over the door. Here Holmes turned suddenly to the right, and
     we found ourselves in a large, square, empty room, heavily shadowed
     in the corners, but faintly lit in the centre from the lights of the
     street beyond. There was no lamp near and the window was thick with
     dust, so that we could only just discern each other's figures within.
     My companion put his hand upon my shoulder and his lips close to my
     ear.

     "Do you know where we are?" he whispered.

     "Surely that is Baker Street," I answered, staring through the dim
     window.

     "Exactly. We are in Camden House, which stands opposite to our own
     old quarters."

     "But why are we here?"

     "Because it commands so excellent a view of that picturesque pile.
     Might I trouble you, my dear Watson, to draw a little nearer to the
     window, taking every precaution not to show yourself, and then to
     look up at our old rooms--the starting-point of so many of our little
     adventures? We will see if my three years of absence have entirely
     taken away my power to surprise you."

     I crept forward and looked across at the familiar window. As my eyes
     fell upon it I gave a gasp and a cry of amazement. The blind was down
     and a strong light was burning in the room. The shadow of a man who
     was seated in a chair within was thrown in hard, black outline upon
     the luminous screen of the window. There was no mistaking the poise
     of the head, the squareness of the shoulders, the sharpness of the
     features. The face was turned half-round, and the effect was that of
     one of those black silhouettes which our grandparents loved to frame.
     It was a perfect reproduction of Holmes. So amazed was I that I threw
     out my hand to make sure that the man himself was standing beside me.
     He was quivering with silent laughter.

     "Well?" said he.

     "Good heavens!" I cried. "It is marvellous."

     "I trust that age doth not wither nor custom stale my infinite
     variety,'" said he, and I recognised in his voice the joy and pride
     which the artist takes in his own creation. "It really is rather like
     me, is it not?"

     "I should be prepared to swear that it was you."

     "The credit of the execution is due to Monsieur Oscar Meunier, of
     Grenoble, who spent some days in doing the moulding. It is a bust in
     wax. The rest I arranged myself during my visit to Baker Street this
     afternoon."

     "But why?"

     "Because, my dear Watson, I had the strongest possible reason for
     wishing certain people to think that I was there when I was really
     elsewhere."

     "And you thought the rooms were watched?"

     "I knew that they were watched."

     "By whom?"

     "By my old enemies, Watson. By the charming society whose leader lies
     in the Reichenbach Fall. You must remember that they knew, and only
     they knew, that I was still alive. Sooner or later they believed that
     I should come back to my rooms. They watched them continuously, and
     this morning they saw me arrive."

     "How do you know?"

     "Because I recognised their sentinel when I glanced out of my window.
     He is a harmless enough fellow, Parker by name, a garroter by trade,
     and a remarkable performer upon the Jew's harp. I cared nothing for
     him. But I cared a great deal for the much more formidable person who
     was behind him, the bosom friend of Moriarty, the man who dropped the
     rocks over the cliff, the most cunning and dangerous criminal in
     London. That is the man who is after me to-night, Watson, and that is
     the man who is quite unaware that we are after him."

     My friend's plans were gradually revealing themselves. From this
     convenient retreat the watchers were being watched and the trackers
     tracked. That angular shadow up yonder was the bait and we were the
     hunters. In silence we stood together in the darkness and watched the
     hurrying figures who passed and repassed in front of us. Holmes was
     silent and motionless; but I could tell that he was keenly alert, and
     that his eyes were fixed intently upon the stream of passers-by. It
     was a bleak and boisterous night, and the wind whistled shrilly down
     the long street. Many people were moving to and fro, most of them
     muffled in their coats and cravats. Once or twice it seemed to me
     that I had seen the same figure before, and I especially noticed two
     men who appeared to be sheltering themselves from the wind in the
     doorway of a house some distance up the street. I tried to draw my
     companion's attention to them, but he gave a little ejaculation of
     impatience and continued to stare into the street. More than once he
     fidgeted with his feet and tapped rapidly with his fingers upon the
     wall. It was evident to me that he was becoming uneasy and that his
     plans were not working out altogether as he had hoped. At last, as
     midnight approached and the street gradually cleared, he paced up and
     down the room in uncontrollable agitation. I was about to make some
     remark to him when I raised my eyes to the lighted window and again
     experienced almost as great a surprise as before. I clutched Holmes's
     arm and pointed upwards.

     "The shadow has moved!" I cried.

     It was, indeed, no longer the profile, but the back, which was turned
     towards us.

     Three years had certainly not smoothed the asperities of his temper
     or his impatience with a less active intelligence than his own.

     "Of course it has moved," said he. "Am I such a farcical bungler,
     Watson, that I should erect an obvious dummy and expect that some of
     the sharpest men in Europe would be deceived by it? We have been in
     this room two hours, and Mrs. Hudson has made some change in that
     figure eight times, or once in every quarter of an hour. She works it
     from the front so that her shadow may never be seen. Ah!" He drew in
     his breath with a shrill, excited intake. In the dim light I saw his
     head thrown forward, his whole attitude rigid with attention.
     Outside, the street was absolutely deserted. Those two men might
     still be crouching in the doorway, but I could no longer see them.
     All was still and dark, save only that brilliant yellow screen in
     front of us with the black figure outlined upon its centre. Again in
     the utter silence I heard that thin, sibilant note which spoke of
     intense suppressed excitement. An instant later he pulled me back
     into the blackest corner of the room, and I felt his warning hand
     upon my lips. The fingers which clutched me were quivering. Never had
     I known my friend more moved, and yet the dark street still stretched
     lonely and motionless before us.

     But suddenly I was aware of that which his keener senses had already
     distinguished. A low, stealthy sound came to my ears, not from the
     direction of Baker Street, but from the back of the very house in
     which we lay concealed. A door opened and shut. An instant later
     steps crept down the passage--steps which were meant to be silent,
     but which reverberated harshly through the empty house. Holmes
     crouched back against the wall and I did the same, my hand closing
     upon the handle of my revolver. Peering through the gloom, I saw the
     vague outline of a man, a shade blacker than the blackness of the
     open door. He stood for an instant, and then he crept forward,
     crouching, menacing, into the room. He was within three yards of us,
     this sinister figure, and I had braced myself to meet his spring,
     before I realized that he had no idea of our presence. He passed
     close beside us, stole over to the window, and very softly and
     noiselessly raised it for half a foot. As he sank to the level of
     this opening the light of the street, no longer dimmed by the dusty
     glass, fell full upon his face. The man seemed to be beside himself
     with excitement. His two eyes shone like stars and his features were
     working convulsively. He was an elderly man, with a thin, projecting
     nose, a high, bald forehead, and a huge grizzled moustache. An
     opera-hat was pushed to the back of his head, and an evening dress
     shirt-front gleamed out through his open overcoat. His face was gaunt
     and swarthy, scored with deep, savage lines. In his hand he carried
     what appeared to be a stick, but as he laid it down upon the floor it
     gave a metallic clang. Then from the pocket of his overcoat he drew a
     bulky object, and he busied himself in some task which ended with a
     loud, sharp click, as if a spring or bolt had fallen into its place.
     Still kneeling upon the floor he bent forward and threw all his
     weight and strength upon some lever, with the result that there came
     a long, whirling, grinding noise, ending once more in a powerful
     click. He straightened himself then, and I saw that what he held in
     his hand was a sort of gun, with a curiously misshapen butt. He
     opened it at the breech, put something in, and snapped the
     breech-block. Then, crouching down, he rested the end of the barrel
     upon the ledge of the open window, and I saw his long moustache droop
     over the stock and his eye gleam as it peered along the sights. I
     heard a little sigh of satisfaction as he cuddled the butt into his
     shoulder, and saw that amazing target, the black man on the yellow
     ground, standing clear at the end of his fore sight. For an instant
     he was rigid and motionless. Then his finger tightened on the
     trigger. There was a strange, loud whiz and a long, silvery tinkle of
     broken glass. At that instant Holmes sprang like a tiger on to the
     marksman's back and hurled him flat upon his face. He was up again in
     a moment, and with convulsive strength he seized Holmes by the
     throat; but I struck him on the head with the butt of my revolver and
     he dropped again upon the floor. I fell upon him, and as I held him
     my comrade blew a shrill call upon a whistle. There was the clatter
     of running feet upon the pavement, and two policemen in uniform, with
     one plain-clothes detective, rushed through the front entrance and
     into the room.

     "That you, Lestrade?" said Holmes.

     "Yes, Mr. Holmes. I took the job myself. It's good to see you back in
     London, sir."

     "I think you want a little unofficial help. Three undetected murders
     in one year won't do, Lestrade. But you handled the Molesey Mystery
     with less than your usual--that's to say, you handled it fairly
     well."

     We had all risen to our feet, our prisoner breathing hard, with a
     stalwart constable on each side of him. Already a few loiterers had
     begun to collect in the street. Holmes stepped up to the window,
     closed it, and dropped the blinds. Lestrade had produced two candles
     and the policemen had uncovered their lanterns. I was able at last to
     have a good look at our prisoner.

     It was a tremendously virile and yet sinister face which was turned
     towards us. With the brow of a philosopher above and the jaw of a
     sensualist below, the man must have started with great capacities for
     good or for evil. But one could not look upon his cruel blue eyes,
     with their drooping, cynical lids, or upon the fierce, aggressive
     nose and the threatening, deep-lined brow, without reading Nature's
     plainest danger-signals. He took no heed of any of us, but his eyes
     were fixed upon Holmes's face with an expression in which hatred and
     amazement were equally blended. "You fiend!" he kept on muttering.
     "You clever, clever fiend!"

     "Ah, Colonel!" said Holmes, arranging his rumpled collar; "'journeys
     end in lovers' meetings,' as the old play says. I don't think I have
     had the pleasure of seeing you since you favoured me with those
     attentions as I lay on the ledge above the Reichenbach Fall."

     The Colonel still stared at my friend like a man in a trance. "You
     cunning, cunning fiend!" was all that he could say.

     "I have not introduced you yet," said Holmes. "This, gentlemen, is
     Colonel Sebastian Moran, once of Her Majesty's Indian Army, and the
     best heavy game shot that our Eastern Empire has ever produced. I
     believe I am correct, Colonel, in saying that your bag of tigers
     still remains unrivalled?"

     The fierce old man said nothing, but still glared at my companion;
     with his savage eyes and bristling moustache he was wonderfully like
     a tiger himself.

     "I wonder that my very simple stratagem could deceive so old a
     shikari," said Holmes. "It must be very familiar to you. Have you not
     tethered a young kid under a tree, lain above it with your rifle, and
     waited for the bait to bring up your tiger? This empty house is my
     tree and you are my tiger. You have possibly had other guns in
     reserve in case there should be several tigers, or in the unlikely
     supposition of your own aim failing you. These," he pointed around,
     "are my other guns. The parallel is exact."

     Colonel Moran sprang forward, with a snarl of rage, but the
     constables dragged him back. The fury upon his face was terrible to
     look at.

     "I confess that you had one small surprise for me," said Holmes. "I
     did not anticipate that you would yourself make use of this empty
     house and this convenient front window. I had imagined you as
     operating from the street, where my friend Lestrade and his merry men
     were awaiting you. With that exception all has gone as I expected."

     Colonel Moran turned to the official detective.

     "You may or may not have just cause for arresting me," said he, "but
     at least there can be no reason why I should submit to the gibes of
     this person. If I am in the hands of the law let things be done in a
     legal way."

     "Well, that's reasonable enough," said Lestrade. "Nothing further you
     have to say, Mr. Holmes, before we go?"

     Holmes had picked up the powerful air-gun from the floor and was
     examining its mechanism.

     "An admirable and unique weapon," said he, "noiseless and of
     tremendous power. I knew Von Herder, the blind German mechanic, who
     constructed it to the order of the late Professor Moriarty. For years
     I have been aware of its existence, though I have never before had
     the opportunity of handling it. I commend it very specially to your
     attention, Lestrade, and also the bullets which fit it."

     "You can trust us to look after that, Mr. Holmes," said Lestrade, as
     the whole party moved towards the door. "Anything further to say?"

     "Only to ask what charge you intend to prefer?"

     "What charge, sir? Why, of course, the attempted murder of Mr.
     Sherlock Holmes."

     "Not so, Lestrade. I do not propose to appear in the matter at all.
     To you, and to you only, belongs the credit of the remarkable arrest
     which you have effected. Yes, Lestrade, I congratulate you! With your
     usual happy mixture of cunning and audacity you have got him."

     "Got him! Got whom, Mr. Holmes?"

     "The man that the whole force has been seeking in vain--Colonel
     Sebastian Moran, who shot the Honourable Ronald Adair with an
     expanding bullet from an air-gun through the open window of the
     second-floor front of No. 427, Park Lane, upon the 30th of last
     month. That's the charge, Lestrade. And now, Watson, if you can
     endure the draught from a broken window, I think that half an hour in
     my study over a cigar may afford you some profitable amusement."

     Our old chambers had been left unchanged through the supervision of
     Mycroft Holmes and the immediate care of Mrs. Hudson. As I entered I
     saw, it is true, an unwonted tidiness, but the old landmarks were all
     in their place. There were the chemical corner and the acid-stained,
     deal-topped table. There upon a shelf was the row of formidable
     scrap-books and books of reference which many of our fellow-citizens
     would have been so glad to burn. The diagrams, the violin-case, and
     the pipe-rack--even the Persian slipper which contained the
     tobacco--all met my eyes as I glanced round me. There were two
     occupants of the room--one Mrs. Hudson, who beamed upon us both as we
     entered; the other the strange dummy which had played so important a
     part in the evening's adventures. It was a wax-coloured model of my
     friend, so admirably done that it was a perfect facsimile. It stood
     on a small pedestal table with an old dressing-gown of Holmes's so
     draped round it that the illusion from the street was absolutely
     perfect.

     "I hope you preserved all precautions, Mrs. Hudson?" said Holmes.

     "I went to it on my knees, sir, just as you told me."

     "Excellent. You carried the thing out very well. Did you observe
     where the bullet went?"

     "Yes, sir. I'm afraid it has spoilt your beautiful bust, for it
     passed right through the head and flattened itself on the wall. I
     picked it up from the carpet. Here it is!"

     Holmes held it out to me. "A soft revolver bullet, as you perceive,
     Watson. There's genius in that, for who would expect to find such a
     thing fired from an air-gun. All right, Mrs. Hudson, I am much
     obliged for your assistance. And now, Watson, let me see you in your
     old seat once more, for there are several points which I should like
     to discuss with you."

     He had thrown off the seedy frock-coat, and now he was the Holmes of
     old in the mouse-coloured dressing-gown which he took from his
     effigy.

     "The old shikari's nerves have not lost their steadiness nor his eyes
     their keenness," said he, with a laugh, as he inspected the shattered
     forehead of his bust.

     "Plumb in the middle of the back of the head and smack through the
     brain. He was the best shot in India, and I expect that there are few
     better in London. Have you heard the name?"

     "No, I have not."

     "Well, well, such is fame! But, then, if I remember aright, you had
     not heard the name of Professor James Moriarty, who had one of the
     great brains of the century. Just give me down my index of
     biographies from the shelf."

     He turned over the pages lazily, leaning back in his chair and
     blowing great clouds from his cigar.

     "My collection of M's is a fine one," said he. "Moriarty himself is
     enough to make any letter illustrious, and here is Morgan the
     poisoner, and Merridew of abominable memory, and Mathews, who knocked
     out my left canine in the waiting-room at Charing Cross, and,
     finally, here is our friend of to-night."

     He handed over the book, and I read:

     Moran, Sebastian, Colonel. Unemployed. Formerly 1st Bengalore
     Pioneers. Born London, 1840. Son of Sir Augustus Moran, C.B., once
     British Minister to Persia. Educated Eton and Oxford. Served in
     Jowaki Campaign, Afghan Campaign, Charasiab (despatches), Sherpur,
     and Cabul. Author of Heavy Game of the Western Himalayas, 1881; Three
     Months in the Jungle, 1884. Address: Conduit Street. Clubs: The
     Anglo-Indian, the Tankerville, the Bagatelle Card Club.

     On the margin was written, in Holmes's precise hand:

     The second most dangerous man in London.

     "This is astonishing," said I, as I handed back the volume. "The
     man's career is that of an honourable soldier."

     "It is true," Holmes answered. "Up to a certain point he did well. He
     was always a man of iron nerve, and the story is still told in India
     how he crawled down a drain after a wounded man-eating tiger. There
     are some trees, Watson, which grow to a certain height and then
     suddenly develop some unsightly eccentricity. You will see it often
     in humans. I have a theory that the individual represents in his
     development the whole procession of his ancestors, and that such a
     sudden turn to good or evil stands for some strong influence which
     came into the line of his pedigree. The person becomes, as it were,
     the epitome of the history of his own family."

     "It is surely rather fanciful."

     "Well, I don't insist upon it. Whatever the cause, Colonel Moran
     began to go wrong. Without any open scandal he still made India too
     hot to hold him. He retired, came to London, and again acquired an
     evil name. It was at this time that he was sought out by Professor
     Moriarty, to whom for a time he was chief of the staff. Moriarty
     supplied him liberally with money and used him only in one or two
     very high-class jobs which no ordinary criminal could have
     undertaken. You may have some recollection of the death of Mrs.
     Stewart, of Lauder, in 1887. Not? Well, I am sure Moran was at the
     bottom of it; but nothing could be proved. So cleverly was the
     Colonel concealed that even when the Moriarty gang was broken up we
     could not incriminate him. You remember at that date, when I called
     upon you in your rooms, how I put up the shutters for fear of
     air-guns? No doubt you thought me fanciful. I knew exactly what I was
     doing, for I knew of the existence of this remarkable gun, and I knew
     also that one of the best shots in the world would be behind it. When
     we were in Switzerland he followed us with Moriarty, and it was
     undoubtedly he who gave me that evil five minutes on the Reichenbach
     ledge.

     "You may think that I read the papers with some attention during my
     sojourn in France, on the look-out for any chance of laying him by
     the heels. So long as he was free in London my life would really not
     have been worth living. Night and day the shadow would have been over
     me, and sooner or later his chance must have come. What could I do? I
     could not shoot him at sight, or I should myself be in the dock.
     There was no use appealing to a magistrate. They cannot interfere on
     the strength of what would appear to them to be a wild suspicion. So
     I could do nothing. But I watched the criminal news, knowing that
     sooner or later I should get him. Then came the death of this Ronald
     Adair. My chance had come at last! Knowing what I did, was it not
     certain that Colonel Moran had done it? He had played cards with the
     lad; he had followed him home from the club; he had shot him through
     the open window. There was not a doubt of it. The bullets alone are
     enough to put his head in a noose. I came over at once. I was seen by
     the sentinel, who would, I knew, direct the Colonel's attention to my
     presence. He could not fail to connect my sudden return with his
     crime and to be terribly alarmed. I was sure that he would make an
     attempt to get me out of the way at once, and would bring round his
     murderous weapon for that purpose. I left him an excellent mark in
     the window, and, having warned the police that they might be
     needed--by the way, Watson, you spotted their presence in that
     doorway with unerring accuracy--I took up what seemed to me to be a
     judicious post for observation, never dreaming that he would choose
     the same spot for his attack. Now, my dear Watson, does anything
     remain for me to explain?"

     "Yes," said I. "You have not made it clear what was Colonel Moran's
     motive in murdering the Honourable Ronald Adair."

     "Ah! my dear Watson, there we come into those realms of conjecture
     where the most logical mind may be at fault. Each may form his own
     hypothesis upon the present evidence, and yours is as likely to be
     correct as mine."

     "You have formed one, then?"

     "I think that it is not difficult to explain the facts. It came out
     in evidence that Colonel Moran and young Adair had between them won a
     considerable amount of money. Now, Moran undoubtedly played foul--of
     that I have long been aware. I believe that on the day of the murder
     Adair had discovered that Moran was cheating. Very likely he had
     spoken to him privately, and had threatened to expose him unless he
     voluntarily resigned his membership of the club and promised not to
     play cards again. It is unlikely that a youngster like Adair would at
     once make a hideous scandal by exposing a well-known man so much
     older than himself. Probably he acted as I suggest. The exclusion
     from his clubs would mean ruin to Moran, who lived by his ill-gotten
     card gains. He therefore murdered Adair, who at the time was
     endeavouring to work out how much money he should himself return,
     since he could not profit by his partner's foul play. He locked the
     door lest the ladies should surprise him and insist upon knowing what
     he was doing with these names and coins. Will it pass?"

     "I have no doubt that you have hit upon the truth."

     "It will be verified or disproved at the trial. Meanwhile, come what
     may, Colonel Moran will trouble us no more, the famous air-gun of Von
     Herder will embellish the Scotland Yard Museum, and once again Mr.
     Sherlock Holmes is free to devote his life to examining those
     interesting little problems which the complex life of London so
     plentifully presents."






                      THE ADVENTURE OF THE NORWOOD BUILDER

     "From the point of view of the criminal expert," said Mr. Sherlock
     Holmes, "London has become a singularly uninteresting city since the
     death of the late lamented Professor Moriarty."

     "I can hardly think that you would find many decent citizens to agree
     with you," I answered.

     "Well, well, I must not be selfish," said he, with a smile, as he
     pushed back his chair from the breakfast-table. "The community is
     certainly the gainer, and no one the loser, save the poor out-of-work
     specialist, whose occupation has gone. With that man in the field
     one's morning paper presented infinite possibilities. Often it was
     only the smallest trace, Watson, the faintest indication, and yet it
     was enough to tell me that the great malignant brain was there, as
     the gentlest tremors of the edges of the web remind one of the foul
     spider which lurks in the centre. Petty thefts, wanton assaults,
     purposeless outrage--to the man who held the clue all could be worked
     into one connected whole. To the scientific student of the higher
     criminal world no capital in Europe offered the advantages which
     London then possessed. But now--" He shrugged his shoulders in
     humorous deprecation of the state of things which he had himself done
     so much to produce.

     At the time of which I speak Holmes had been back for some months,
     and I, at his request, had sold my practice and returned to share the
     old quarters in Baker Street. A young doctor, named Verner, had
     purchased my small Kensington practice, and given with astonishingly
     little demur the highest price that I ventured to ask--an incident
     which only explained itself some years later when I found that Verner
     was a distant relation of Holmes's, and that it was my friend who had
     really found the money.

     Our months of partnership had not been so uneventful as he had
     stated, for I find, on looking over my notes, that this period
     includes the case of the papers of Ex-President Murillo, and also the
     shocking affair of the Dutch steamship Friesland, which so nearly
     cost us both our lives. His cold and proud nature was always averse,
     however, to anything in the shape of public applause, and he bound me
     in the most stringent terms to say no further word of himself, his
     methods, or his successes--a prohibition which, as I have explained,
     has only now been removed.

     Mr. Sherlock Holmes was leaning back in his chair after his whimsical
     protest, and was unfolding his morning paper in a leisurely fashion,
     when our attention was arrested by a tremendous ring at the bell,
     followed immediately by a hollow drumming sound, as if someone were
     beating on the outer door with his fist. As it opened there came a
     tumultuous rush into the hall, rapid feet clattered up the stair, and
     an instant later a wild-eyed and frantic young man, pale,
     dishevelled, and palpitating, burst into the room. He looked from one
     to the other of us, and under our gaze of inquiry he became conscious
     that some apology was needed for this unceremonious entry.

     "I'm sorry, Mr. Holmes," he cried. "You mustn't blame me. I am nearly
     mad. Mr. Holmes, I am the unhappy John Hector McFarlane."

     He made the announcement as if the name alone would explain both his
     visit and its manner; but I could see by my companion's unresponsive
     face that it meant no more to him than to me.

     "Have a cigarette, Mr. McFarlane," said he, pushing his case across.
     "I am sure that with your symptoms my friend Dr. Watson here would
     prescribe a sedative. The weather has been so very warm these last
     few days. Now, if you feel a little more composed, I should be glad
     if you would sit down in that chair and tell us very slowly and
     quietly who you are and what it is that you want. You mentioned your
     name as if I should recognise it, but I assure you that, beyond the
     obvious facts that you are a bachelor, a solicitor, a Freemason, and
     an asthmatic, I know nothing whatever about you."

     Familiar as I was with my friend's methods, it was not difficult for
     me to follow his deductions, and to observe the untidiness of attire,
     the sheaf of legal papers, the watch-charm, and the breathing which
     had prompted them. Our client, however, stared in amazement.

     "Yes, I am all that, Mr. Holmes, and in addition I am the most
     unfortunate man at this moment in London. For Heaven's sake don't
     abandon me, Mr. Holmes! If they come to arrest me before I have
     finished my story, make them give me time so that I may tell you the
     whole truth. I could go to jail happy if I knew that you were working
     for me outside."

     "Arrest you!" said Holmes. "This is really most grati--most
     interesting. On what charge do you expect to be arrested?"

     "Upon the charge of murdering Mr. Jonas Oldacre, of Lower Norwood."

     My companion's expressive face showed a sympathy which was not, I am
     afraid, entirely unmixed with satisfaction.

     "Dear me," said he; "it was only this moment at breakfast that I was
     saying to my friend, Dr. Watson, that sensational cases had
     disappeared out of our papers."

     Our visitor stretched forward a quivering hand and picked up the
     Daily Telegraph, which still lay upon Holmes's knee.

     "If you had looked at it, sir, you would have seen at a glance what
     the errand is on which I have come to you this morning. I feel as if
     my name and my misfortune must be in every man's mouth." He turned it
     over to expose the central page. "Here it is, and with your
     permission I will read it to you. Listen to this, Mr. Holmes. The
     head-lines are: 'Mysterious Affair at Lower Norwood. Disappearance of
     a Well-known Builder. Suspicion of Murder and Arson. A Clue to the
     Criminal.' That is the clue which they are already following, Mr.
     Holmes, and I know that it leads infallibly to me. I have been
     followed from London Bridge Station, and I am sure that they are only
     waiting for the warrant to arrest me. It will break my mother's
     heart--it will break her heart!" He wrung his hands in an agony of
     apprehension, and swayed backwards and forwards in his chair.

     I looked with interest upon this man, who was accused of being the
     perpetrator of a crime of violence. He was flaxen-haired and handsome
     in a washed-out negative fashion, with frightened blue eyes and a
     clean-shaven face, with a weak, sensitive mouth. His age may have
     been about twenty-seven; his dress and bearing that of a gentleman.
     From the pocket of his light summer overcoat protruded the bundle of
     endorsed papers which proclaimed his profession.

     "We must use what time we have," said Holmes. "Watson, would you have
     the kindness to take the paper and to read me the paragraph in
     question?"

     Underneath the vigorous head-lines which our client had quoted I read
     the following suggestive narrative:--

     "Late last night, or early this morning, an incident occurred at
     Lower Norwood which points, it is feared, to a serious crime. Mr.
     Jonas Oldacre is a well-known resident of that suburb, where he has
     carried on his business as a builder for many years. Mr. Oldacre is a
     bachelor, fifty-two years of age, and lives in Deep Dene House, at
     the Sydenham end of the road of that name. He has had the reputation
     of being a man of eccentric habits, secretive and retiring. For some
     years he has practically withdrawn from the business, in which he is
     said to have amassed considerable wealth. A small timber-yard still
     exists, however, at the back of the house, and last night, about
     twelve o'clock, an alarm was given that one of the stacks was on
     fire. The engines were soon upon the spot, but the dry wood burned
     with great fury, and it was impossible to arrest the conflagration
     until the stack had been entirely consumed. Up to this point the
     incident bore the appearance of an ordinary accident, but fresh
     indications seem to point to serious crime. Surprise was expressed at
     the absence of the master of the establishment from the scene of the
     fire, and an inquiry followed, which showed that he had disappeared
     from the house. An examination of his room revealed that the bed had
     not been slept in, that a safe which stood in it was open, that a
     number of important papers were scattered about the room, and,
     finally, that there were signs of a murderous struggle, slight traces
     of blood being found within the room, and an oaken walking-stick,
     which also showed stains of blood upon the handle. It is known that
     Mr. Jonas Oldacre had received a late visitor in his bedroom upon
     that night, and the stick found has been identified as the property
     of this person, who is a young London solicitor named John Hector
     McFarlane, junior partner of Graham and McFarlane, of 426, Gresham
     Buildings, E.C. The police believe that they have evidence in their
     possession which supplies a very convincing motive for the crime, and
     altogether it cannot be doubted that sensational developments will
     follow.
     "Later.--It is rumoured as we go to press that Mr. John Hector
     McFarlane has actually been arrested on the charge of the murder of
     Mr. Jonas Oldacre. It is at least certain that a warrant has been
     issued. There have been further and sinister developments in the
     investigation at Norwood. Besides the signs of a struggle in the room
     of the unfortunate builder it is now known that the French windows of
     his bedroom (which is on the ground floor) were found to be open,
     that there were marks as if some bulky object had been dragged across
     to the wood-pile, and, finally, it is asserted that charred remains
     have been found among the charcoal ashes of the fire. The police
     theory is that a most sensational crime has been committed, that the
     victim was clubbed to death in his own bedroom, his papers rifled,
     and his dead body dragged across to the wood-stack, which was then
     ignited so as to hide all traces of the crime. The conduct of the
     criminal investigation has been left in the experienced hands of
     Inspector Lestrade, of Scotland Yard, who is following up the clues
     with his accustomed energy and sagacity."

     Sherlock Holmes listened with closed eyes and finger-tips together to
     this remarkable account.

     "The case has certainly some points of interest," said he, in his
     languid fashion. "May I ask, in the first place, Mr. McFarlane, how
     it is that you are still at liberty, since there appears to be enough
     evidence to justify your arrest?"

     "I live at Torrington Lodge, Blackheath, with my parents, Mr. Holmes;
     but last night, having to do business very late with Mr. Jonas
     Oldacre, I stayed at an hotel in Norwood, and came to my business
     from there. I knew nothing of this affair until I was in the train,
     when I read what you have just heard. I at once saw the horrible
     danger of my position, and I hurried to put the case into your hands.
     I have no doubt that I should have been arrested either at my City
     office or at my home. A man followed me from London Bridge Station,
     and I have no doubt--Great Heaven, what is that?"

     It was a clang of the bell, followed instantly by heavy steps upon
     the stair. A moment later our old friend Lestrade appeared in the
     doorway. Over his shoulder I caught a glimpse of one or two uniformed
     policemen outside.

     "Mr. John Hector McFarlane?" said Lestrade.

     Our unfortunate client rose with a ghastly face.

     "I arrest you for the wilful murder of Mr. Jonas Oldacre, of Lower
     Norwood."

     McFarlane turned to us with a gesture of despair, and sank into his
     chair once more like one who is crushed.

     "One moment, Lestrade," said Holmes. "Half an hour more or less can
     make no difference to you, and the gentleman was about to give us an
     account of this very interesting affair, which might aid us in
     clearing it up."

     "I think there will be no difficulty in clearing it up," said
     Lestrade, grimly.

     "None the less, with your permission, I should be much interested to
     hear his account."

     "Well, Mr. Holmes, it is difficult for me to refuse you anything, for
     you have been of use to the force once or twice in the past, and we
     owe you a good turn at Scotland Yard," said Lestrade. "At the same
     time I must remain with my prisoner, and I am bound to warn him that
     anything he may say will appear in evidence against him."

     "I wish nothing better," said our client. "All I ask is that you
     should hear and recognise the absolute truth."

     Lestrade looked at his watch. "I'll give you half an hour," said he.

     "I must explain first," said McFarlane, "that I knew nothing of Mr.
     Jonas Oldacre. His name was familiar to me, for many years ago my
     parents were acquainted with him, but they drifted apart. I was very
     much surprised, therefore, when yesterday, about three o'clock in the
     afternoon, he walked into my office in the City. But I was still more
     astonished when he told me the object of his visit. He had in his
     hand several sheets of a note-book, covered with scribbled
     writing--here they are--and he laid them on my table.

     "'Here is my will,' said he. 'I want you, Mr. McFarlane, to cast it
     into proper legal shape. I will sit here while you do so.'

     "I set myself to copy it, and you can imagine my astonishment when I
     found that, with some reservations, he had left all his property to
     me. He was a strange little, ferret-like man, with white eyelashes,
     and when I looked up at him I found his keen grey eyes fixed upon me
     with an amused expression. I could hardly believe my own senses as I
     read the terms of the will; but he explained that he was a bachelor
     with hardly any living relation, that he had known my parents in his
     youth, and that he had always heard of me as a very deserving young
     man, and was assured that his money would be in worthy hands. Of
     course, I could only stammer out my thanks. The will was duly
     finished, signed, and witnessed by my clerk. This is it on the blue
     paper, and these slips, as I have explained, are the rough draft. Mr.
     Jonas Oldacre then informed me that there were a number of
     documents--building leases, title-deeds, mortgages, scrip, and so
     forth--which it was necessary that I should see and understand. He
     said that his mind would not be easy until the whole thing was
     settled, and he begged me to come out to his house at Norwood that
     night, bringing the will with me, and to arrange matters. 'Remember,
     my boy, not one word to your parents about the affair until
     everything is settled. We will keep it as a little surprise for
     them.' He was very insistent upon this point, and made me promise it
     faithfully.

     "You can imagine, Mr. Holmes, that I was not in a humour to refuse
     him anything that he might ask. He was my benefactor, and all my
     desire was to carry out his wishes in every particular. I sent a
     telegram home, therefore, to say that I had important business on
     hand, and that it was impossible for me to say how late I might be.
     Mr. Oldacre had told me that he would like me to have supper with him
     at nine, as he might not be home before that hour. I had some
     difficulty in finding his house, however, and it was nearly half-past
     before I reached it. I found him--"

     "One moment!" said Holmes. "Who opened the door?"

     "A middle-aged woman, who was, I suppose, his housekeeper."

     "And it was she, I presume, who mentioned your name?"

     "Exactly," said McFarlane.

     "Pray proceed."

     McFarlane wiped his damp brow and then continued his narrative:--

     "I was shown by this woman into a sitting-room, where a frugal supper
     was laid out. Afterwards Mr. Jonas Oldacre led me into his bedroom,
     in which there stood a heavy safe. This he opened and took out a mass
     of documents, which we went over together. It was between eleven and
     twelve when we finished. He remarked that we must not disturb the
     housekeeper. He showed me out through his own French window, which
     had been open all this time."

     "Was the blind down?" asked Holmes.

     "I will not be sure, but I believe that it was only half down. Yes, I
     remember how he pulled it up in order to swing open the window. I
     could not find my stick, and he said, 'Never mind, my boy; I shall
     see a good deal of you now, I hope, and I will keep your stick until
     you come back to claim it.' I left him there, the safe open, and the
     papers made up in packets upon the table. It was so late that I could
     not get back to Blackheath, so I spent the night at the Anerley Arms,
     and I knew nothing more until I read of this horrible affair in the
     morning."

     "Anything more that you would like to ask, Mr. Holmes?" said
     Lestrade, whose eyebrows had gone up once or twice during this
     remarkable explanation.

     "Not until I have been to Blackheath."

     "You mean to Norwood," said Lestrade.

     "Oh, yes; no doubt that is what I must have meant," said Holmes, with
     his enigmatical smile. Lestrade had learned by more experiences than
     he would care to acknowledge that that razor-like brain could cut
     through that which was impenetrable to him. I saw him look curiously
     at my companion.

     "I think I should like to have a word with you presently, Mr.
     Sherlock Holmes," said he. "Now, Mr. McFarlane, two of my constables
     are at the door and there is a four-wheeler waiting." The wretched
     young man arose, and with a last beseeching glance at us walked from
     the room. The officers conducted him to the cab, but Lestrade
     remained.

     Holmes had picked up the pages which formed the rough draft of the
     will, and was looking at them with the keenest interest upon his
     face.

     "There are some points about that document, Lestrade, are there not?"
     said he, pushing them over.

     The official looked at them with a puzzled expression.

     "I can read the first few lines, and these in the middle of the
     second page, and one or two at the end. Those are as clear as print,"
     said he; "but the writing in between is very bad, and there are three
     places where I cannot read it at all."

     "What do you make of that?" said Holmes.

     "Well, what do you make of it?"

     "That it was written in a train; the good writing represents
     stations, the bad writing movement, and the very bad writing passing
     over points. A scientific expert would pronounce at once that this
     was drawn up on a suburban line, since nowhere save in the immediate
     vicinity of a great city could there be so quick a succession of
     points. Granting that his whole journey was occupied in drawing up
     the will, then the train was an express, only stopping once between
     Norwood and London Bridge."

     Lestrade began to laugh.

     "You are too many for me when you begin to get on your theories, Mr.
     Holmes," said he. "How does this bear on the case?"

     "Well, it corroborates the young man's story to the extent that the
     will was drawn up by Jonas Oldacre in his journey yesterday. It is
     curious--is it not?--that a man should draw up so important a
     document in so haphazard a fashion. It suggests that he did not think
     it was going to be of much practical importance. If a man drew up a
     will which he did not intend ever to be effective he might do it so."

     "Well, he drew up his own death-warrant at the same time," said
     Lestrade.

     "Oh, you think so?"

     "Don't you?"

     "Well, it is quite possible; but the case is not clear to me yet."

     "Not clear? Well, if that isn't clear, what could be clear? Here is a
     young man who learns suddenly that if a certain older man dies he
     will succeed to a fortune. What does he do? He says nothing to
     anyone, but he arranges that he shall go out on some pretext to see
     his client that night; he waits until the only other person in the
     house is in bed, and then in the solitude of a man's room he murders
     him, burns his body in the wood-pile, and departs to a neighbouring
     hotel. The blood-stains in the room and also on the stick are very
     slight. It is probable that he imagined his crime to be a bloodless
     one, and hoped that if the body were consumed it would hide all
     traces of the method of his death--traces which for some reason must
     have pointed to him. Is all this not obvious?"

     "It strikes me, my good Lestrade, as being just a trifle too
     obvious," said Holmes. "You do not add imagination to your other
     great qualities; but if you could for one moment put yourself in the
     place of this young man, would you choose the very night after the
     will had been made to commit your crime? Would it not seem dangerous
     to you to make so very close a relation between the two incidents?
     Again, would you choose an occasion when you are known to be in the
     house, when a servant has let you in? And, finally, would you take
     the great pains to conceal the body and yet leave your own stick as a
     sign that you were the criminal? Confess, Lestrade, that all this is
     very unlikely."

     "As to the stick, Mr. Holmes, you know as well as I do that a
     criminal is often flurried and does things which a cool man would
     avoid. He was very likely afraid to go back to the room. Give me
     another theory that would fit the facts."

     "I could very easily give you half-a-dozen," said Holmes. "Here, for
     example, is a very possible and even probable one. I make you a free
     present of it. The older man is showing documents which are of
     evident value. A passing tramp sees them through the window, the
     blind of which is only half down. Exit the solicitor. Enter the
     tramp! He seizes a stick, which he observes there, kills Oldacre, and
     departs after burning the body."

     "Why should the tramp burn the body?"

     "For the matter of that why should McFarlane?"

     "To hide some evidence."

     "Possibly the tramp wanted to hide that any murder at all had been
     committed."

     "And why did the tramp take nothing?"

     "Because they were papers that he could not negotiate."

     Lestrade shook his head, though it seemed to me that his manner was
     less absolutely assured than before.

     "Well, Mr. Sherlock Holmes, you may look for your tramp, and while
     you are finding him we will hold on to our man. The future will show
     which is right. Just notice this point, Mr. Holmes: that so far as we
     know none of the papers were removed, and that the prisoner is the
     one man in the world who had no reason for removing them, since he
     was heir-at-law and would come into them in any case."

     My friend seemed struck by this remark.

     "I don't mean to deny that the evidence is in some ways very strongly
     in favour of your theory," said he. "I only wish to point out that
     there are other theories possible. As you say, the future will
     decide. Good morning! I dare say that in the course of the day I
     shall drop in at Norwood and see how you are getting on."

     When the detective departed my friend rose and made his preparations
     for the day's work with the alert air of a man who has a congenial
     task before him.

     "My first movement, Watson," said he, as he bustled into his
     frock-coat, "must, as I said, be in the direction of Blackheath."

     "And why not Norwood?"

     "Because we have in this case one singular incident coming close to
     the heels of another singular incident. The police are making the
     mistake of concentrating their attention upon the second, because it
     happens to be the one which is actually criminal. But it is evident
     to me that the logical way to approach the case is to begin by trying
     to throw some light upon the first incident--the curious will, so
     suddenly made, and to so unexpected an heir. It may do something to
     simplify what followed. No, my dear fellow, I don't think you can
     help me. There is no prospect of danger, or I should not dream of
     stirring out without you. I trust that when I see you in the evening
     I will be able to report that I have been able to do something for
     this unfortunate youngster who has thrown himself upon my
     protection."

     It was late when my friend returned, and I could see by a glance at
     his haggard and anxious face that the high hopes with which he had
     started had not been fulfilled. For an hour he droned away upon his
     violin, endeavouring to soothe his own ruffled spirits. At last he
     flung down the instrument and plunged into a detailed account of his
     misadventures.

     "It's all going wrong, Watson--all as wrong as it can go. I kept a
     bold face before Lestrade, but, upon my soul, I believe that for once
     the fellow is on the right track and we are on the wrong. All my
     instincts are one way and all the facts are the other, and I much
     fear that British juries have not yet attained that pitch of
     intelligence when they will give the preference to my theories over
     Lestrade's facts."

     "Did you go to Blackheath?"

     "Yes, Watson, I went there, and I found very quickly that the late
     lamented Oldacre was a pretty considerable black-guard. The father
     was away in search of his son. The mother was at home--a little,
     fluffy, blue-eyed person, in a tremor of fear and indignation. Of
     course, she would not admit even the possibility of his guilt. But
     she would not express either surprise or regret over the fate of
     Oldacre. On the contrary, she spoke of him with such bitterness that
     she was unconsciously considerably strengthening the case of the
     police, for, of course, if her son had heard her speak of the man in
     this fashion it would predispose him towards hatred and violence. 'He
     was more like a malignant and cunning ape than a human being,' said
     she, 'and he always was, ever since he was a young man.'

     "'You knew him at that time?' said I.

     "'Yes, I knew him well; in fact, he was an old suitor of mine. Thank
     Heaven that I had the sense to turn away from him and to marry a
     better, if a poorer, man. I was engaged to him, Mr. Holmes, when I
     heard a shocking story of how he had turned a cat loose in an aviary,
     and I was so horrified at his brutal cruelty that I would have
     nothing more to do with him.' She rummaged in a bureau, and presently
     she produced a photograph of a woman, shamefully defaced and
     mutilated with a knife. 'That is my own photograph,' she said. 'He
     sent it to me in that state, with his curse, upon my wedding
     morning.'

     "'Well,' said I, 'at least he has forgiven you now, since he has left
     all his property to your son.'

     "'Neither my son nor I want anything from Jonas Oldacre, dead or
     alive,' she cried, with a proper spirit. 'There is a God in Heaven,
     Mr. Holmes, and that same God who has punished that wicked man will
     show in His own good time that my son's hands are guiltless of his
     blood.'

     "Well, I tried one or two leads, but could get at nothing which would
     help our hypothesis, and several points which would make against it.
     I gave it up at last and off I went to Norwood.

     "This place, Deep Dene House, is a big modern villa of staring brick,
     standing back in its own grounds, with a laurel-clumped lawn in front
     of it. To the right and some distance back from the road was the
     timber-yard which had been the scene of the fire. Here's a rough plan
     on a leaf of my note-book. This window on the left is the one which
     opens into Oldacre's room. You can look into it from the road, you
     see. That is about the only bit of consolation I have had to-day.
     Lestrade was not there, but his head constable did the honours. They
     had just made a great treasure-trove. They had spent the morning
     raking among the ashes of the burned wood-pile, and besides the
     charred organic remains they had secured several discoloured metal
     discs. I examined them with care, and there was no doubt that they
     were trouser buttons. I even distinguished that one of them was
     marked with the name of 'Hyams,' who was Oldacre's tailor. I then
     worked the lawn very carefully for signs and traces, but this drought
     has made everything as hard as iron. Nothing was to be seen save that
     some body or bundle had been dragged through a low privet hedge which
     is in a line with the wood-pile. All that, of course, fits in with
     the official theory. I crawled about the lawn with an August sun on
     my back, but I got up at the end of an hour no wiser than before.

     "Well, after this fiasco I went into the bedroom and examined that
     also. The blood-stains were very slight, mere smears and
     discolorations, but undoubtedly fresh. The stick had been removed,
     but there also the marks were slight. There is no doubt about the
     stick belonging to our client. He admits it. Footmarks of both men
     could be made out on the carpet, but none of any third person, which
     again is a trick for the other side. They were piling up their score
     all the time and we were at a standstill.

     "Only one little gleam of hope did I get--and yet it amounted to
     nothing. I examined the contents of the safe, most of which had been
     taken out and left on the table. The papers had been made up into
     sealed envelopes, one or two of which had been opened by the police.
     They were not, so far as I could judge, of any great value, nor did
     the bank-book show that Mr. Oldacre was in such very affluent
     circumstances. But it seemed to me that all the papers were not
     there. There were allusions to some deeds--possibly the more
     valuable--which I could not find. This, of course, if we could
     definitely prove it, would turn Lestrade's argument against himself,
     for who would steal a thing if he knew that he would shortly inherit
     it?

     "Finally, having drawn every other cover and picked up no scent, I
     tried my luck with the housekeeper. Mrs. Lexington is her name, a
     little, dark, silent person, with suspicious and sidelong eyes. She
     could tell us something if she would--I am convinced of it. But she
     was as close as wax. Yes, she had let Mr. McFarlane in at half-past
     nine. She wished her hand had withered before she had done so. She
     had gone to bed at half-past ten. Her room was at the other end of
     the house, and she could hear nothing of what passed. Mr. McFarlane
     had left his hat, and to the best of her belief his stick, in the
     hall. She had been awakened by the alarm of fire. Her poor, dear
     master had certainly been murdered. Had he any enemies? Well, every
     man had enemies, but Mr. Oldacre kept himself very much to himself,
     and only met people in the way of business. She had seen the buttons,
     and was sure that they belonged to the clothes which he had worn last
     night. The wood-pile was very dry, for it had not rained for a month.
     It burned like tinder, and by the time she reached the spot nothing
     could be seen but flames. She and all the firemen smelled the burned
     flesh from inside it. She knew nothing of the papers, nor of Mr.
     Oldacre's private affairs.

     "So, my dear Watson, there's my report of a failure. And yet--and
     yet--"--he clenched his thin hands in a paroxysm of conviction--"I
     know it's all wrong. I feel it in my bones. There is something that
     has not come out, and that housekeeper knows it. There was a sort of
     sulky defiance in her eyes, which only goes with guilty knowledge.
     However, there's no good talking any more about it, Watson; but
     unless some lucky chance comes our way I fear that the Norwood
     Disappearance Case will not figure in that chronicle of our successes
     which I foresee that a patient public will sooner or later have to
     endure."

     "Surely," said I, "the man's appearance would go far with any jury?"

     "That is a dangerous argument, my dear Watson. You remember that
     terrible murderer, Bert Stevens, who wanted us to get him off in '87?
     Was there ever a more mild-mannered, Sunday-school young man?"

     "It is true."

     "Unless we succeed in establishing an alternative theory this man is
     lost. You can hardly find a flaw in the case which can now be
     presented against him, and all further investigation has served to
     strengthen it. By the way, there is one curious little point about
     those papers which may serve us as the starting-point for an inquiry.
     On looking over the bank-book I found that the low state of the
     balance was principally due to large cheques which have been made out
     during the last year to Mr. Cornelius. I confess that I should be
     interested to know who this Mr. Cornelius may be with whom a retired
     builder has such very large transactions. Is it possible that he has
     had a hand in the affair? Cornelius might be a broker, but we have
     found no scrip to correspond with these large payments. Failing any
     other indication my researches must now take the direction of an
     inquiry at the bank for the gentleman who has cashed these cheques.
     But I fear, my dear fellow, that our case will end ingloriously by
     Lestrade hanging our client, which will certainly be a triumph for
     Scotland Yard."

     I do not know how far Sherlock Holmes took any sleep that night, but
     when I came down to breakfast I found him pale and harassed, his
     bright eyes the brighter for the dark shadows round them. The carpet
     round his chair was littered with cigarette-ends and with the early
     editions of the morning papers. An open telegram lay upon the table.

     "What do you think of this, Watson?" he asked, tossing it across.

     It was from Norwood, and ran as follows:

     "Important fresh evidence to hand. McFarlane's guilt definitely
     established. Advise you to abandon case.
     Lestrade.

     "This sounds serious," said I.

     "It is Lestrade's little cock-a-doodle of victory," Holmes answered,
     with a bitter smile. "And yet it may be premature to abandon the
     case. After all, important fresh evidence is a two-edged thing, and
     may possibly cut in a very different direction to that which Lestrade
     imagines. Take your breakfast, Watson, and we will go out together
     and see what we can do. I feel as if I shall need your company and
     your moral support to-day."

     My friend had no breakfast himself, for it was one of his
     peculiarities that in his more intense moments he would permit
     himself no food, and I have known him presume upon his iron strength
     until he has fainted from pure inanition. "At present I cannot spare
     energy and nerve force for digestion," he would say in answer to my
     medical remonstrances. I was not surprised, therefore, when this
     morning he left his untouched meal behind him and started with me for
     Norwood. A crowd of morbid sightseers were still gathered round Deep
     Dene House, which was just such a suburban villa as I had pictured.
     Within the gates Lestrade met us, his face flushed with victory, his
     manner grossly triumphant.

     "Well, Mr. Holmes, have you proved us to be wrong yet? Have you found
     your tramp?" he cried.

     "I have formed no conclusion whatever," my companion answered.

     "But we formed ours yesterday, and now it proves to be correct; so
     you must acknowledge that we have been a little in front of you this
     time, Mr. Holmes."

     "You certainly have the air of something unusual having occurred,"
     said Holmes.

     Lestrade laughed loudly.

     "You don't like being beaten any more than the rest of us do," said
     he. "A man can't expect always to have it his own way, can he, Dr.
     Watson? Step this way, if you please, gentlemen, and I think I can
     convince you once for all that it was John McFarlane who did this
     crime."

    



